The Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman	﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman	﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman	﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman
			
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
			
			
Title: Leaves of Grass	Title: Leaves of Grass	Title: Leaves of Grass	Title: Leaves of Grass
			
Author: Walt Whitman	Author: Walt Whitman	Author: Walt Whitman	Author: Walt Whitman
			
Posting Date: August 24, 2008 [EBook #1322]	Posting Date: August 24, 2008 [EBook #1322]	Posting Date: August 24, 2008 [EBook #1322]	Posting Date: August 24, 2008 [EBook #1322]
Release Date: May, 1998	Release Date: May, 1998	Release Date: May, 1998	Release Date: May, 1998
			
Language: English	Language: English	Language: English	Language: English
			
			
*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***	*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***	*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***	*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***
			
			
			
			
Produced by G. Fuhrman	Produced by G. Fuhrman	Produced by G. Fuhrman	Produced by G. Fuhrman
			
			
			
			
			
LEAVES OF GRASS	LEAVES OF GRASS	LEAVES OF GRASS	LEAVES OF GRASS
			
By Walt Whitman	By Walt Whitman	By Walt Whitman	By Walt Whitman
			
			
			
     Come, said my soul,	     Come, said my soul,	     Come, said my soul,	     Come, said my soul,
     Such verses for my Body let us write, (for we are one,)	     Such verses for my Body let us write, (for we are one,)	     Such verses for my Body let us write, (for we are one,)	     Such verses for my Body let us write, (for we are one,)
     That should I after return,	     That should I after return,	     That should I after return,	     That should I after return,
     Or, long, long hence, in other spheres,	     Or, long, long hence, in other spheres,	     Or, long, long hence, in other spheres,	     Or, long, long hence, in other spheres,
     There to some group of mates the chants resuming,	     There to some group of mates the chants resuming,	     There to some group of mates the chants resuming,	     There to some group of mates the chants resuming,
     (Tallying Earth's soil, trees, winds, tumultuous waves,)	     (Tallying Earth's soil, trees, winds, tumultuous waves,)	     (Tallying Earth's soil, trees, winds, tumultuous waves,)	     (Tallying Earth's soil, trees, winds, tumultuous waves,)
     Ever with pleas'd smile I may keep on,	     Ever with pleas'd smile I may keep on,	     Ever with pleas'd smile I may keep on,	     Ever with pleas'd smile I may keep on,
     Ever and ever yet the verses owning--as, first, I here and now	     Ever and ever yet the verses owning--as, first, I here and now	     Ever and ever yet the verses owning--as, first, I here and now	     Ever and ever yet the verses owning--as, first, I here and now
     Signing for Soul and Body, set to them my name,	     Signing for Soul and Body, set to them my name,	     Signing for Soul and Body, set to them my name,	     Signing for Soul and Body, set to them my name,
			
     Walt Whitman	     Walt Whitman	     Walt Whitman	     Walt Whitman
			
			
			
			
			
BOOK I.  INSCRIPTIONS	BOOK I.  INSCRIPTIONS	BOOK I.  INSCRIPTIONS	BOOK I.  INSCRIPTIONS
			
			
			
			
One's-Self I Sing	One's-Self I Sing	One's-Self I Sing	One's-Self I Sing
			
  One's-self I sing, a simple separate person,	  One's-self I sing, a simple separate person,	  One's-self I sing, a simple separate person,	  One's-self I sing, a simple separate person,
  Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-Masse.	  Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-Masse.	  Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-Masse.	  Yet utter the word Democratic, the word En-Masse.
			
  Of physiology from top to toe I sing,	  Of physiology from top to toe I sing,	  Of physiology from top to toe I sing,	  Of physiology from top to toe I sing,
  Not physiognomy alone nor brain alone is worthy for the Muse, I say	  Not physiognomy alone nor brain alone is worthy for the Muse, I say	  Not physiognomy alone nor brain alone is worthy for the Muse, I say	  Not physiognomy alone nor brain alone is worthy for the Muse, I say
      the Form complete is worthier far,	      the Form complete is worthier far,	      the Form complete is worthier far,	      the Form complete is worthier far,
  The Female equally with the Male I sing.	  The Female equally with the Male I sing.	  The Female equally with the Male I sing.	  The Female equally with the Male I sing.
			
  Of Life immense in passion, pulse, and power,	  Of Life immense in passion, pulse, and power,	  Of Life immense in passion, pulse, and power,	  Of Life immense in passion, pulse, and power,
  Cheerful, for freest action form'd under the laws divine,	  Cheerful, for freest action form'd under the laws divine,	  Cheerful, for freest action form'd under the laws divine,	  Cheerful, for freest action form'd under the laws divine,
  The Modern Man I sing.	  The Modern Man I sing.	  The Modern Man I sing.	  The Modern Man I sing.
			
			
			
			
As I Ponder'd in Silence	As I Ponder'd in Silence	As I Ponder'd in Silence	As I Ponder'd in Silence
			
  As I ponder'd in silence,	  As I ponder'd in silence,	  As I ponder'd in silence,	  As I ponder'd in silence,
  Returning upon my poems, considering, lingering long,	  Returning upon my poems, considering, lingering long,	  Returning upon my poems, considering, lingering long,	  Returning upon my poems, considering, lingering long,
  A Phantom arose before me with distrustful aspect,	  A Phantom arose before me with distrustful aspect,	  A Phantom arose before me with distrustful aspect,	  A Phantom arose before me with distrustful aspect,
  Terrible in beauty, age, and power,	  Terrible in beauty, age, and power,	  Terrible in beauty, age, and power,	  Terrible in beauty, age, and power,
  The genius of poets of old lands,	  The genius of poets of old lands,	  The genius of poets of old lands,	  The genius of poets of old lands,
  As to me directing like flame its eyes,	  As to me directing like flame its eyes,	  As to me directing like flame its eyes,	  As to me directing like flame its eyes,
  With finger pointing to many immortal songs,	  With finger pointing to many immortal songs,	  With finger pointing to many immortal songs,	  With finger pointing to many immortal songs,
  And menacing voice, What singest thou? it said,	  And menacing voice, What singest thou? it said,	  And menacing voice, What singest thou? it said,	  And menacing voice, What singest thou? it said,
  Know'st thou not there is but one theme for ever-enduring bards?	  Know'st thou not there is but one theme for ever-enduring bards?	  Know'st thou not there is but one theme for ever-enduring bards?	  Know'st thou not there is but one theme for ever-enduring bards?
  And that is the theme of War, the fortune of battles,	  And that is the theme of War, the fortune of battles,	  And that is the theme of War, the fortune of battles,	  And that is the theme of War, the fortune of battles,
  The making of perfect soldiers.	  The making of perfect soldiers.	  The making of perfect soldiers.	  The making of perfect soldiers.
			
  Be it so, then I answer'd,	  Be it so, then I answer'd,	  Be it so, then I answer'd,	  Be it so, then I answer'd,
  I too haughty Shade also sing war, and a longer and greater one than any,	  I too haughty Shade also sing war, and a longer and greater one than any,	  I too haughty Shade also sing war, and a longer and greater one than any,	  I too haughty Shade also sing war, and a longer and greater one than any,
  Waged in my book with varying fortune, with flight, advance	  Waged in my book with varying fortune, with flight, advance	  Waged in my book with varying fortune, with flight, advance	  Waged in my book with varying fortune, with flight, advance
      and retreat, victory deferr'd and wavering,	      and retreat, victory deferr'd and wavering,	      and retreat, victory deferr'd and wavering,	      and retreat, victory deferr'd and wavering,
  (Yet methinks certain, or as good as certain, at the last,) the	  (Yet methinks certain, or as good as certain, at the last,) the	  (Yet methinks certain, or as good as certain, at the last,) the	  (Yet methinks certain, or as good as certain, at the last,) the
      field the world,	      field the world,	      field the world,	      field the world,
  For life and death, for the Body and for the eternal Soul,	  For life and death, for the Body and for the eternal Soul,	  For life and death, for the Body and for the eternal Soul,	  For life and death, for the Body and for the eternal Soul,
  Lo, I too am come, chanting the chant of battles,	  Lo, I too am come, chanting the chant of battles,	  Lo, I too am come, chanting the chant of battles,	  Lo, I too am come, chanting the chant of battles,
  I above all promote brave soldiers.	  I above all promote brave soldiers.	  I above all promote brave soldiers.	  I above all promote brave soldiers.
			
			
			
			
In Cabin'd Ships at Sea	In Cabin'd Ships at Sea	In Cabin'd Ships at Sea	In Cabin'd Ships at Sea
			
  In cabin'd ships at sea,	  In cabin'd ships at sea,	  In cabin'd ships at sea,	  In cabin'd ships at sea,
  The boundless blue on every side expanding,	  The boundless blue on every side expanding,	  The boundless blue on every side expanding,	  The boundless blue on every side expanding,
  With whistling winds and music of the waves, the large imperious waves,	  With whistling winds and music of the waves, the large imperious waves,	  With whistling winds and music of the waves, the large imperious waves,	  With whistling winds and music of the waves, the large imperious waves,
  Or some lone bark buoy'd on the dense marine,	  Or some lone bark buoy'd on the dense marine,	  Or some lone bark buoy'd on the dense marine,	  Or some lone bark buoy'd on the dense marine,
  Where joyous full of faith, spreading white sails,	  Where joyous full of faith, spreading white sails,	  Where joyous full of faith, spreading white sails,	  Where joyous full of faith, spreading white sails,
  She cleaves the ether mid the sparkle and the foam of day, or under	  She cleaves the ether mid the sparkle and the foam of day, or under	  She cleaves the ether mid the sparkle and the foam of day, or under	  She cleaves the ether mid the sparkle and the foam of day, or under
      many a star at night,	      many a star at night,	      many a star at night,	      many a star at night,
  By sailors young and old haply will I, a reminiscence of the land, be read,	  By sailors young and old haply will I, a reminiscence of the land, be read,	  By sailors young and old haply will I, a reminiscence of the land, be read,	  By sailors young and old haply will I, a reminiscence of the land, be read,
  In full rapport at last.	  In full rapport at last.	  In full rapport at last.	  In full rapport at last.
			
  Here are our thoughts, voyagers' thoughts,	  Here are our thoughts, voyagers' thoughts,	  Here are our thoughts, voyagers' thoughts,	  Here are our thoughts, voyagers' thoughts,
  Here not the land, firm land, alone appears, may then by them be said,	  Here not the land, firm land, alone appears, may then by them be said,	  Here not the land, firm land, alone appears, may then by them be said,	  Here not the land, firm land, alone appears, may then by them be said,
  The sky o'erarches here, we feel the undulating deck beneath our feet,	  The sky o'erarches here, we feel the undulating deck beneath our feet,	  The sky o'erarches here, we feel the undulating deck beneath our feet,	  The sky o'erarches here, we feel the undulating deck beneath our feet,
  We feel the long pulsation, ebb and flow of endless motion,	  We feel the long pulsation, ebb and flow of endless motion,	  We feel the long pulsation, ebb and flow of endless motion,	  We feel the long pulsation, ebb and flow of endless motion,
  The tones of unseen mystery, the vague and vast suggestions of the	  The tones of unseen mystery, the vague and vast suggestions of the	  The tones of unseen mystery, the vague and vast suggestions of the	  The tones of unseen mystery, the vague and vast suggestions of the
      briny world, the liquid-flowing syllables,	      briny world, the liquid-flowing syllables,	      briny world, the liquid-flowing syllables,	      briny world, the liquid-flowing syllables,
  The perfume, the faint creaking of the cordage, the melancholy rhythm,	  The perfume, the faint creaking of the cordage, the melancholy rhythm,	  The perfume, the faint creaking of the cordage, the melancholy rhythm,	  The perfume, the faint creaking of the cordage, the melancholy rhythm,
  The boundless vista and the horizon far and dim are all here,	  The boundless vista and the horizon far and dim are all here,	  The boundless vista and the horizon far and dim are all here,	  The boundless vista and the horizon far and dim are all here,
  And this is ocean's poem.	  And this is ocean's poem.	  And this is ocean's poem.	  And this is ocean's poem.
			
  Then falter not O book, fulfil your destiny,	  Then falter not O book, fulfil your destiny,	  Then falter not O book, fulfil your destiny,	  Then falter not O book, fulfil your destiny,
  You not a reminiscence of the land alone,	  You not a reminiscence of the land alone,	  You not a reminiscence of the land alone,	  You not a reminiscence of the land alone,
  You too as a lone bark cleaving the ether, purpos'd I know not	  You too as a lone bark cleaving the ether, purpos'd I know not	  You too as a lone bark cleaving the ether, purpos'd I know not	  You too as a lone bark cleaving the ether, purpos'd I know not
      whither, yet ever full of faith,	      whither, yet ever full of faith,	      whither, yet ever full of faith,	      whither, yet ever full of faith,
  Consort to every ship that sails, sail you!	  Consort to every ship that sails, sail you!	  Consort to every ship that sails, sail you!	  Consort to every ship that sails, sail you!
  Bear forth to them folded my love, (dear mariners, for you I fold it	  Bear forth to them folded my love, (dear mariners, for you I fold it	  Bear forth to them folded my love, (dear mariners, for you I fold it	  Bear forth to them folded my love, (dear mariners, for you I fold it
      here in every leaf;)	      here in every leaf;)	      here in every leaf;)	      here in every leaf;)
  Speed on my book! spread your white sails my little bark athwart the	  Speed on my book! spread your white sails my little bark athwart the	  Speed on my book! spread your white sails my little bark athwart the	  Speed on my book! spread your white sails my little bark athwart the
      imperious waves,	      imperious waves,	      imperious waves,	      imperious waves,
  Chant on, sail on, bear o'er the boundless blue from me to every sea,	  Chant on, sail on, bear o'er the boundless blue from me to every sea,	  Chant on, sail on, bear o'er the boundless blue from me to every sea,	  Chant on, sail on, bear o'er the boundless blue from me to every sea,
  This song for mariners and all their ships.	  This song for mariners and all their ships.	  This song for mariners and all their ships.	  This song for mariners and all their ships.
			
			
			
			
To Foreign Lands	To Foreign Lands	To Foreign Lands	To Foreign Lands
			
  I heard that you ask'd for something to prove this puzzle the New World,	  I heard that you ask'd for something to prove this puzzle the New World,	  I heard that you ask'd for something to prove this puzzle the New World,	  I heard that you ask'd for something to prove this puzzle the New World,
  And to define America, her athletic Democracy,	  And to define America, her athletic Democracy,	  And to define America, her athletic Democracy,	  And to define America, her athletic Democracy,
  Therefore I send you my poems that you behold in them what you wanted.	  Therefore I send you my poems that you behold in them what you wanted.	  Therefore I send you my poems that you behold in them what you wanted.	  Therefore I send you my poems that you behold in them what you wanted.
			
			
			
			
To a Historian	To a Historian	To a Historian	To a Historian
			
  You who celebrate bygones,	  You who celebrate bygones,	  You who celebrate bygones,	  You who celebrate bygones,
  Who have explored the outward, the surfaces of the races, the life	  Who have explored the outward, the surfaces of the races, the life	  Who have explored the outward, the surfaces of the races, the life	  Who have explored the outward, the surfaces of the races, the life
      that has exhibited itself,	      that has exhibited itself,	      that has exhibited itself,	      that has exhibited itself,
  Who have treated of man as the creature of politics, aggregates,	  Who have treated of man as the creature of politics, aggregates,	  Who have treated of man as the creature of politics, aggregates,	  Who have treated of man as the creature of politics, aggregates,
      rulers and priests,	      rulers and priests,	      rulers and priests,	      rulers and priests,
  I, habitan of the Alleghanies, treating of him as he is in himself	  I, habitan of the Alleghanies, treating of him as he is in himself	  I, habitan of the Alleghanies, treating of him as he is in himself	  I, habitan of the Alleghanies, treating of him as he is in himself
      in his own rights,	      in his own rights,	      in his own rights,	      in his own rights,
  Pressing the pulse of the life that has seldom exhibited itself,	  Pressing the pulse of the life that has seldom exhibited itself,	  Pressing the pulse of the life that has seldom exhibited itself,	  Pressing the pulse of the life that has seldom exhibited itself,
      (the great pride of man in himself,)	      (the great pride of man in himself,)	      (the great pride of man in himself,)	      (the great pride of man in himself,)
  Chanter of Personality, outlining what is yet to be,	  Chanter of Personality, outlining what is yet to be,	  Chanter of Personality, outlining what is yet to be,	  Chanter of Personality, outlining what is yet to be,
  I project the history of the future.	  I project the history of the future.	  I project the history of the future.	  I project the history of the future.
			
			
			
			
To Thee Old Cause	To Thee Old Cause	To Thee Old Cause	To Thee Old Cause
			
  To thee old cause!	  To thee old cause!	  To thee old cause!	  To thee old cause!
  Thou peerless, passionate, good cause,	  Thou peerless, passionate, good cause,	  Thou peerless, passionate, good cause,	  Thou peerless, passionate, good cause,
  Thou stern, remorseless, sweet idea,	  Thou stern, remorseless, sweet idea,	  Thou stern, remorseless, sweet idea,	  Thou stern, remorseless, sweet idea,
  Deathless throughout the ages, races, lands,	  Deathless throughout the ages, races, lands,	  Deathless throughout the ages, races, lands,	  Deathless throughout the ages, races, lands,
  After a strange sad war, great war for thee,	  After a strange sad war, great war for thee,	  After a strange sad war, great war for thee,	  After a strange sad war, great war for thee,
  (I think all war through time was really fought, and ever will be	  (I think all war through time was really fought, and ever will be	  (I think all war through time was really fought, and ever will be	  (I think all war through time was really fought, and ever will be
      really fought, for thee,)	      really fought, for thee,)	      really fought, for thee,)	      really fought, for thee,)
  These chants for thee, the eternal march of thee.	  These chants for thee, the eternal march of thee.	  These chants for thee, the eternal march of thee.	  These chants for thee, the eternal march of thee.
			
  (A war O soldiers not for itself alone,	  (A war O soldiers not for itself alone,	  (A war O soldiers not for itself alone,	  (A war O soldiers not for itself alone,
  Far, far more stood silently waiting behind, now to advance in this book.)	  Far, far more stood silently waiting behind, now to advance in this book.)	  Far, far more stood silently waiting behind, now to advance in this book.)	  Far, far more stood silently waiting behind, now to advance in this book.)
			
  Thou orb of many orbs!	  Thou orb of many orbs!	  Thou orb of many orbs!	  Thou orb of many orbs!
  Thou seething principle! thou well-kept, latent germ! thou centre!	  Thou seething principle! thou well-kept, latent germ! thou centre!	  Thou seething principle! thou well-kept, latent germ! thou centre!	  Thou seething principle! thou well-kept, latent germ! thou centre!
  Around the idea of thee the war revolving,	  Around the idea of thee the war revolving,	  Around the idea of thee the war revolving,	  Around the idea of thee the war revolving,
  With all its angry and vehement play of causes,	  With all its angry and vehement play of causes,	  With all its angry and vehement play of causes,	  With all its angry and vehement play of causes,
  (With vast results to come for thrice a thousand years,)	  (With vast results to come for thrice a thousand years,)	  (With vast results to come for thrice a thousand years,)	  (With vast results to come for thrice a thousand years,)
  These recitatives for thee,--my book and the war are one,	  These recitatives for thee,--my book and the war are one,	  These recitatives for thee,--my book and the war are one,	  These recitatives for thee,--my book and the war are one,
  Merged in its spirit I and mine, as the contest hinged on thee,	  Merged in its spirit I and mine, as the contest hinged on thee,	  Merged in its spirit I and mine, as the contest hinged on thee,	  Merged in its spirit I and mine, as the contest hinged on thee,
  As a wheel on its axis turns, this book unwitting to itself,	  As a wheel on its axis turns, this book unwitting to itself,	  As a wheel on its axis turns, this book unwitting to itself,	  As a wheel on its axis turns, this book unwitting to itself,
  Around the idea of thee.	  Around the idea of thee.	  Around the idea of thee.	  Around the idea of thee.
			
			
			
			
Eidolons	Eidolons	Eidolons	Eidolons
			
       I met a seer,	       I met a seer,	       I met a seer,	       I met a seer,
  Passing the hues and objects of the world,	  Passing the hues and objects of the world,	  Passing the hues and objects of the world,	  Passing the hues and objects of the world,
  The fields of art and learning, pleasure, sense,	  The fields of art and learning, pleasure, sense,	  The fields of art and learning, pleasure, sense,	  The fields of art and learning, pleasure, sense,
       To glean eidolons.	       To glean eidolons.	       To glean eidolons.	       To glean eidolons.
			
       Put in thy chants said he,	       Put in thy chants said he,	       Put in thy chants said he,	       Put in thy chants said he,
  No more the puzzling hour nor day, nor segments, parts, put in,	  No more the puzzling hour nor day, nor segments, parts, put in,	  No more the puzzling hour nor day, nor segments, parts, put in,	  No more the puzzling hour nor day, nor segments, parts, put in,
  Put first before the rest as light for all and entrance-song of all,	  Put first before the rest as light for all and entrance-song of all,	  Put first before the rest as light for all and entrance-song of all,	  Put first before the rest as light for all and entrance-song of all,
       That of eidolons.	       That of eidolons.	       That of eidolons.	       That of eidolons.
			
       Ever the dim beginning,	       Ever the dim beginning,	       Ever the dim beginning,	       Ever the dim beginning,
  Ever the growth, the rounding of the circle,	  Ever the growth, the rounding of the circle,	  Ever the growth, the rounding of the circle,	  Ever the growth, the rounding of the circle,
  Ever the summit and the merge at last, (to surely start again,)	  Ever the summit and the merge at last, (to surely start again,)	  Ever the summit and the merge at last, (to surely start again,)	  Ever the summit and the merge at last, (to surely start again,)
       Eidolons! eidolons!	       Eidolons! eidolons!	       Eidolons! eidolons!	       Eidolons! eidolons!
			
       Ever the mutable,	       Ever the mutable,	       Ever the mutable,	       Ever the mutable,
  Ever materials, changing, crumbling, re-cohering,	  Ever materials, changing, crumbling, re-cohering,	  Ever materials, changing, crumbling, re-cohering,	  Ever materials, changing, crumbling, re-cohering,
  Ever the ateliers, the factories divine,	  Ever the ateliers, the factories divine,	  Ever the ateliers, the factories divine,	  Ever the ateliers, the factories divine,
       Issuing eidolons.	       Issuing eidolons.	       Issuing eidolons.	       Issuing eidolons.
			
       Lo, I or you,	       Lo, I or you,	       Lo, I or you,	       Lo, I or you,
  Or woman, man, or state, known or unknown,	  Or woman, man, or state, known or unknown,	  Or woman, man, or state, known or unknown,	  Or woman, man, or state, known or unknown,
  We seeming solid wealth, strength, beauty build,	  We seeming solid wealth, strength, beauty build,	  We seeming solid wealth, strength, beauty build,	  We seeming solid wealth, strength, beauty build,
       But really build eidolons.	       But really build eidolons.	       But really build eidolons.	       But really build eidolons.
			
       The ostent evanescent,	       The ostent evanescent,	       The ostent evanescent,	       The ostent evanescent,
  The substance of an artist's mood or savan's studies long,	  The substance of an artist's mood or savan's studies long,	  The substance of an artist's mood or savan's studies long,	  The substance of an artist's mood or savan's studies long,
  Or warrior's, martyr's, hero's toils,	  Or warrior's, martyr's, hero's toils,	  Or warrior's, martyr's, hero's toils,	  Or warrior's, martyr's, hero's toils,
       To fashion his eidolon.	       To fashion his eidolon.	       To fashion his eidolon.	       To fashion his eidolon.
			
       Of every human life,	       Of every human life,	       Of every human life,	       Of every human life,
  (The units gather'd, posted, not a thought, emotion, deed, left out,)	  (The units gather'd, posted, not a thought, emotion, deed, left out,)	  (The units gather'd, posted, not a thought, emotion, deed, left out,)	  (The units gather'd, posted, not a thought, emotion, deed, left out,)
  The whole or large or small summ'd, added up,	  The whole or large or small summ'd, added up,	  The whole or large or small summ'd, added up,	  The whole or large or small summ'd, added up,
       In its eidolon.	       In its eidolon.	       In its eidolon.	       In its eidolon.
			
       The old, old urge,	       The old, old urge,	       The old, old urge,	       The old, old urge,
  Based on the ancient pinnacles, lo, newer, higher pinnacles,	  Based on the ancient pinnacles, lo, newer, higher pinnacles,	  Based on the ancient pinnacles, lo, newer, higher pinnacles,	  Based on the ancient pinnacles, lo, newer, higher pinnacles,
  From science and the modern still impell'd,	  From science and the modern still impell'd,	  From science and the modern still impell'd,	  From science and the modern still impell'd,
       The old, old urge, eidolons.	       The old, old urge, eidolons.	       The old, old urge, eidolons.	       The old, old urge, eidolons.
			
       The present now and here,	       The present now and here,	       The present now and here,	       The present now and here,
  America's busy, teeming, intricate whirl,	  America's busy, teeming, intricate whirl,	  America's busy, teeming, intricate whirl,	  America's busy, teeming, intricate whirl,
  Of aggregate and segregate for only thence releasing,	  Of aggregate and segregate for only thence releasing,	  Of aggregate and segregate for only thence releasing,	  Of aggregate and segregate for only thence releasing,
       To-day's eidolons.	       To-day's eidolons.	       To-day's eidolons.	       To-day's eidolons.
			
       These with the past,	       These with the past,	       These with the past,	       These with the past,
  Of vanish'd lands, of all the reigns of kings across the sea,	  Of vanish'd lands, of all the reigns of kings across the sea,	  Of vanish'd lands, of all the reigns of kings across the sea,	  Of vanish'd lands, of all the reigns of kings across the sea,
  Old conquerors, old campaigns, old sailors' voyages,	  Old conquerors, old campaigns, old sailors' voyages,	  Old conquerors, old campaigns, old sailors' voyages,	  Old conquerors, old campaigns, old sailors' voyages,
       Joining eidolons.	       Joining eidolons.	       Joining eidolons.	       Joining eidolons.
			
       Densities, growth, facades,	       Densities, growth, facades,	       Densities, growth, facades,	       Densities, growth, facades,
  Strata of mountains, soils, rocks, giant trees,	  Strata of mountains, soils, rocks, giant trees,	  Strata of mountains, soils, rocks, giant trees,	  Strata of mountains, soils, rocks, giant trees,
  Far-born, far-dying, living long, to leave,	  Far-born, far-dying, living long, to leave,	  Far-born, far-dying, living long, to leave,	  Far-born, far-dying, living long, to leave,
       Eidolons everlasting.	       Eidolons everlasting.	       Eidolons everlasting.	       Eidolons everlasting.
			
       Exalte, rapt, ecstatic,	       Exalte, rapt, ecstatic,	       Exalte, rapt, ecstatic,	       Exalte, rapt, ecstatic,
  The visible but their womb of birth,	  The visible but their womb of birth,	  The visible but their womb of birth,	  The visible but their womb of birth,
  Of orbic tendencies to shape and shape and shape,	  Of orbic tendencies to shape and shape and shape,	  Of orbic tendencies to shape and shape and shape,	  Of orbic tendencies to shape and shape and shape,
       The mighty earth-eidolon.	       The mighty earth-eidolon.	       The mighty earth-eidolon.	       The mighty earth-eidolon.
			
       All space, all time,	       All space, all time,	       All space, all time,	       All space, all time,
  (The stars, the terrible perturbations of the suns,	  (The stars, the terrible perturbations of the suns,	  (The stars, the terrible perturbations of the suns,	  (The stars, the terrible perturbations of the suns,
  Swelling, collapsing, ending, serving their longer, shorter use,)	  Swelling, collapsing, ending, serving their longer, shorter use,)	  Swelling, collapsing, ending, serving their longer, shorter use,)	  Swelling, collapsing, ending, serving their longer, shorter use,)
       Fill'd with eidolons only.	       Fill'd with eidolons only.	       Fill'd with eidolons only.	       Fill'd with eidolons only.
			
       The noiseless myriads,	       The noiseless myriads,	       The noiseless myriads,	       The noiseless myriads,
  The infinite oceans where the rivers empty,	  The infinite oceans where the rivers empty,	  The infinite oceans where the rivers empty,	  The infinite oceans where the rivers empty,
  The separate countless free identities, like eyesight,	  The separate countless free identities, like eyesight,	  The separate countless free identities, like eyesight,	  The separate countless free identities, like eyesight,
       The true realities, eidolons.	       The true realities, eidolons.	       The true realities, eidolons.	       The true realities, eidolons.
			
       Not this the world,	       Not this the world,	       Not this the world,	       Not this the world,
  Nor these the universes, they the universes,	  Nor these the universes, they the universes,	  Nor these the universes, they the universes,	  Nor these the universes, they the universes,
  Purport and end, ever the permanent life of life,	  Purport and end, ever the permanent life of life,	  Purport and end, ever the permanent life of life,	  Purport and end, ever the permanent life of life,
       Eidolons, eidolons.	       Eidolons, eidolons.	       Eidolons, eidolons.	       Eidolons, eidolons.
			
       Beyond thy lectures learn'd professor,	       Beyond thy lectures learn'd professor,	       Beyond thy lectures learn'd professor,	       Beyond thy lectures learn'd professor,
  Beyond thy telescope or spectroscope observer keen, beyond all mathematics,	  Beyond thy telescope or spectroscope observer keen, beyond all mathematics,	  Beyond thy telescope or spectroscope observer keen, beyond all mathematics,	  Beyond thy telescope or spectroscope observer keen, beyond all mathematics,
  Beyond the doctor's surgery, anatomy, beyond the chemist with his chemistry,	  Beyond the doctor's surgery, anatomy, beyond the chemist with his chemistry,	  Beyond the doctor's surgery, anatomy, beyond the chemist with his chemistry,	  Beyond the doctor's surgery, anatomy, beyond the chemist with his chemistry,
       The entities of entities, eidolons.	       The entities of entities, eidolons.	       The entities of entities, eidolons.	       The entities of entities, eidolons.
			
       Unfix'd yet fix'd,	       Unfix'd yet fix'd,	       Unfix'd yet fix'd,	       Unfix'd yet fix'd,
  Ever shall be, ever have been and are,	  Ever shall be, ever have been and are,	  Ever shall be, ever have been and are,	  Ever shall be, ever have been and are,
  Sweeping the present to the infinite future,	  Sweeping the present to the infinite future,	  Sweeping the present to the infinite future,	  Sweeping the present to the infinite future,
       Eidolons, eidolons, eidolons.	       Eidolons, eidolons, eidolons.	       Eidolons, eidolons, eidolons.	       Eidolons, eidolons, eidolons.
			
       The prophet and the bard,	       The prophet and the bard,	       The prophet and the bard,	       The prophet and the bard,
  Shall yet maintain themselves, in higher stages yet,	  Shall yet maintain themselves, in higher stages yet,	  Shall yet maintain themselves, in higher stages yet,	  Shall yet maintain themselves, in higher stages yet,
  Shall mediate to the Modern, to Democracy, interpret yet to them,	  Shall mediate to the Modern, to Democracy, interpret yet to them,	  Shall mediate to the Modern, to Democracy, interpret yet to them,	  Shall mediate to the Modern, to Democracy, interpret yet to them,
       God and eidolons.	       God and eidolons.	       God and eidolons.	       God and eidolons.
			
       And thee my soul,	       And thee my soul,	       And thee my soul,	       And thee my soul,
  Joys, ceaseless exercises, exaltations,	  Joys, ceaseless exercises, exaltations,	  Joys, ceaseless exercises, exaltations,	  Joys, ceaseless exercises, exaltations,
  Thy yearning amply fed at last, prepared to meet,	  Thy yearning amply fed at last, prepared to meet,	  Thy yearning amply fed at last, prepared to meet,	  Thy yearning amply fed at last, prepared to meet,
       Thy mates, eidolons.	       Thy mates, eidolons.	       Thy mates, eidolons.	       Thy mates, eidolons.
			
       Thy body permanent,	       Thy body permanent,	       Thy body permanent,	       Thy body permanent,
  The body lurking there within thy body,	  The body lurking there within thy body,	  The body lurking there within thy body,	  The body lurking there within thy body,
  The only purport of the form thou art, the real I myself,	  The only purport of the form thou art, the real I myself,	  The only purport of the form thou art, the real I myself,	  The only purport of the form thou art, the real I myself,
       An image, an eidolon.	       An image, an eidolon.	       An image, an eidolon.	       An image, an eidolon.
			
       Thy very songs not in thy songs,	       Thy very songs not in thy songs,	       Thy very songs not in thy songs,	       Thy very songs not in thy songs,
  No special strains to sing, none for itself,	  No special strains to sing, none for itself,	  No special strains to sing, none for itself,	  No special strains to sing, none for itself,
  But from the whole resulting, rising at last and floating,	  But from the whole resulting, rising at last and floating,	  But from the whole resulting, rising at last and floating,	  But from the whole resulting, rising at last and floating,
       A round full-orb'd eidolon.	       A round full-orb'd eidolon.	       A round full-orb'd eidolon.	       A round full-orb'd eidolon.
			
			
			
			
For Him I Sing	For Him I Sing	For Him I Sing	For Him I Sing
			
  For him I sing,	  For him I sing,	  For him I sing,	  For him I sing,
  I raise the present on the past,	  I raise the present on the past,	  I raise the present on the past,	  I raise the present on the past,
  (As some perennial tree out of its roots, the present on the past,)	  (As some perennial tree out of its roots, the present on the past,)	  (As some perennial tree out of its roots, the present on the past,)	  (As some perennial tree out of its roots, the present on the past,)
  With time and space I him dilate and fuse the immortal laws,	  With time and space I him dilate and fuse the immortal laws,	  With time and space I him dilate and fuse the immortal laws,	  With time and space I him dilate and fuse the immortal laws,
  To make himself by them the law unto himself.	  To make himself by them the law unto himself.	  To make himself by them the law unto himself.	  To make himself by them the law unto himself.
			
			
			
			
When I Read the Book	When I Read the Book	When I Read the Book	When I Read the Book
			
  When I read the book, the biography famous,	  When I read the book, the biography famous,	  When I read the book, the biography famous,	  When I read the book, the biography famous,
  And is this then (said I) what the author calls a man's life?	  And is this then (said I) what the author calls a man's life?	  And is this then (said I) what the author calls a man's life?	  And is this then (said I) what the author calls a man's life?
  And so will some one when I am dead and gone write my life?	  And so will some one when I am dead and gone write my life?	  And so will some one when I am dead and gone write my life?	  And so will some one when I am dead and gone write my life?
  (As if any man really knew aught of my life,	  (As if any man really knew aught of my life,	  (As if any man really knew aught of my life,	  (As if any man really knew aught of my life,
  Why even I myself I often think know little or nothing of my real life,	  Why even I myself I often think know little or nothing of my real life,	  Why even I myself I often think know little or nothing of my real life,	  Why even I myself I often think know little or nothing of my real life,
  Only a few hints, a few diffused faint clews and indirections	  Only a few hints, a few diffused faint clews and indirections	  Only a few hints, a few diffused faint clews and indirections	  Only a few hints, a few diffused faint clews and indirections
  I seek for my own use to trace out here.)	  I seek for my own use to trace out here.)	  I seek for my own use to trace out here.)	  I seek for my own use to trace out here.)
			
			
			
			
Beginning My Studies	Beginning My Studies	Beginning My Studies	Beginning My Studies
			
  Beginning my studies the first step pleas'd me so much,	  Beginning my studies the first step pleas'd me so much,	  Beginning my studies the first step pleas'd me so much,	  Beginning my studies the first step pleas'd me so much,
  The mere fact consciousness, these forms, the power of motion,	  The mere fact consciousness, these forms, the power of motion,	  The mere fact consciousness, these forms, the power of motion,	  The mere fact consciousness, these forms, the power of motion,
  The least insect or animal, the senses, eyesight, love,	  The least insect or animal, the senses, eyesight, love,	  The least insect or animal, the senses, eyesight, love,	  The least insect or animal, the senses, eyesight, love,
  The first step I say awed me and pleas'd me so much,	  The first step I say awed me and pleas'd me so much,	  The first step I say awed me and pleas'd me so much,	  The first step I say awed me and pleas'd me so much,
  I have hardly gone and hardly wish'd to go any farther,	  I have hardly gone and hardly wish'd to go any farther,	  I have hardly gone and hardly wish'd to go any farther,	  I have hardly gone and hardly wish'd to go any farther,
  But stop and loiter all the time to sing it in ecstatic songs.	  But stop and loiter all the time to sing it in ecstatic songs.	  But stop and loiter all the time to sing it in ecstatic songs.	  But stop and loiter all the time to sing it in ecstatic songs.
			
			
			
			
Beginners	Beginners	Beginners	Beginners
			
  How they are provided for upon the earth, (appearing at intervals,)	  How they are provided for upon the earth, (appearing at intervals,)	  How they are provided for upon the earth, (appearing at intervals,)	  How they are provided for upon the earth, (appearing at intervals,)
  How dear and dreadful they are to the earth,	  How dear and dreadful they are to the earth,	  How dear and dreadful they are to the earth,	  How dear and dreadful they are to the earth,
  How they inure to themselves as much as to any--what a paradox	  How they inure to themselves as much as to any--what a paradox	  How they inure to themselves as much as to any--what a paradox	  How they inure to themselves as much as to any--what a paradox
      appears their age,	      appears their age,	      appears their age,	      appears their age,
  How people respond to them, yet know them not,	  How people respond to them, yet know them not,	  How people respond to them, yet know them not,	  How people respond to them, yet know them not,
  How there is something relentless in their fate all times,	  How there is something relentless in their fate all times,	  How there is something relentless in their fate all times,	  How there is something relentless in their fate all times,
  How all times mischoose the objects of their adulation and reward,	  How all times mischoose the objects of their adulation and reward,	  How all times mischoose the objects of their adulation and reward,	  How all times mischoose the objects of their adulation and reward,
  And how the same inexorable price must still be paid for the same	  And how the same inexorable price must still be paid for the same	  And how the same inexorable price must still be paid for the same	  And how the same inexorable price must still be paid for the same
      great purchase.	      great purchase.	      great purchase.	      great purchase.
			
			
			
			
To the States	To the States	To the States	To the States
			
  To the States or any one of them, or any city of the States, Resist	  To the States or any one of them, or any city of the States, Resist	  To the States or any one of them, or any city of the States, Resist	  To the States or any one of them, or any city of the States, Resist
      much, obey little,	      much, obey little,	      much, obey little,	      much, obey little,
  Once unquestioning obedience, once fully enslaved,	  Once unquestioning obedience, once fully enslaved,	  Once unquestioning obedience, once fully enslaved,	  Once unquestioning obedience, once fully enslaved,
  Once fully enslaved, no nation, state, city of this earth, ever	  Once fully enslaved, no nation, state, city of this earth, ever	  Once fully enslaved, no nation, state, city of this earth, ever	  Once fully enslaved, no nation, state, city of this earth, ever
      afterward resumes its liberty.	      afterward resumes its liberty.	      afterward resumes its liberty.	      afterward resumes its liberty.
			
			
			
			
On Journeys Through the States	On Journeys Through the States	On Journeys Through the States	On Journeys Through the States
			
  On journeys through the States we start,	  On journeys through the States we start,	  On journeys through the States we start,	  On journeys through the States we start,
  (Ay through the world, urged by these songs,	  (Ay through the world, urged by these songs,	  (Ay through the world, urged by these songs,	  (Ay through the world, urged by these songs,
  Sailing henceforth to every land, to every sea,)	  Sailing henceforth to every land, to every sea,)	  Sailing henceforth to every land, to every sea,)	  Sailing henceforth to every land, to every sea,)
  We willing learners of all, teachers of all, and lovers of all.	  We willing learners of all, teachers of all, and lovers of all.	  We willing learners of all, teachers of all, and lovers of all.	  We willing learners of all, teachers of all, and lovers of all.
			
  We have watch'd the seasons dispensing themselves and passing on,	  We have watch'd the seasons dispensing themselves and passing on,	  We have watch'd the seasons dispensing themselves and passing on,	  We have watch'd the seasons dispensing themselves and passing on,
  And have said, Why should not a man or woman do as much as the	  And have said, Why should not a man or woman do as much as the	  And have said, Why should not a man or woman do as much as the	  And have said, Why should not a man or woman do as much as the
      seasons, and effuse as much?	      seasons, and effuse as much?	      seasons, and effuse as much?	      seasons, and effuse as much?
			
  We dwell a while in every city and town,	  We dwell a while in every city and town,	  We dwell a while in every city and town,	  We dwell a while in every city and town,
  We pass through Kanada, the North-east, the vast valley of the	  We pass through Kanada, the North-east, the vast valley of the	  We pass through Kanada, the North-east, the vast valley of the	  We pass through Kanada, the North-east, the vast valley of the
      Mississippi, and the Southern States,	      Mississippi, and the Southern States,	      Mississippi, and the Southern States,	      Mississippi, and the Southern States,
  We confer on equal terms with each of the States,	  We confer on equal terms with each of the States,	  We confer on equal terms with each of the States,	  We confer on equal terms with each of the States,
  We make trial of ourselves and invite men and women to hear,	  We make trial of ourselves and invite men and women to hear,	  We make trial of ourselves and invite men and women to hear,	  We make trial of ourselves and invite men and women to hear,
  We say to ourselves, Remember, fear not, be candid, promulge the	  We say to ourselves, Remember, fear not, be candid, promulge the	  We say to ourselves, Remember, fear not, be candid, promulge the	  We say to ourselves, Remember, fear not, be candid, promulge the
      body and the soul,	      body and the soul,	      body and the soul,	      body and the soul,
  Dwell a while and pass on, be copious, temperate, chaste, magnetic,	  Dwell a while and pass on, be copious, temperate, chaste, magnetic,	  Dwell a while and pass on, be copious, temperate, chaste, magnetic,	  Dwell a while and pass on, be copious, temperate, chaste, magnetic,
  And what you effuse may then return as the seasons return,	  And what you effuse may then return as the seasons return,	  And what you effuse may then return as the seasons return,	  And what you effuse may then return as the seasons return,
  And may be just as much as the seasons.	  And may be just as much as the seasons.	  And may be just as much as the seasons.	  And may be just as much as the seasons.
			
			
			
			
To a Certain Cantatrice	To a Certain Cantatrice	To a Certain Cantatrice	To a Certain Cantatrice
			
  Here, take this gift,	  Here, take this gift,	  Here, take this gift,	  Here, take this gift,
  I was reserving it for some hero, speaker, or general,	  I was reserving it for some hero, speaker, or general,	  I was reserving it for some hero, speaker, or general,	  I was reserving it for some hero, speaker, or general,
  One who should serve the good old cause, the great idea, the	  One who should serve the good old cause, the great idea, the	  One who should serve the good old cause, the great idea, the	  One who should serve the good old cause, the great idea, the
      progress and freedom of the race,	      progress and freedom of the race,	      progress and freedom of the race,	      progress and freedom of the race,
  Some brave confronter of despots, some daring rebel;	  Some brave confronter of despots, some daring rebel;	  Some brave confronter of despots, some daring rebel;	  Some brave confronter of despots, some daring rebel;
  But I see that what I was reserving belongs to you just as much as to any.	  But I see that what I was reserving belongs to you just as much as to any.	  But I see that what I was reserving belongs to you just as much as to any.	  But I see that what I was reserving belongs to you just as much as to any.
			
			
			
			
Me Imperturbe	Me Imperturbe	Me Imperturbe	Me Imperturbe
			
  Me imperturbe, standing at ease in Nature,	  Me imperturbe, standing at ease in Nature,	  Me imperturbe, standing at ease in Nature,	  Me imperturbe, standing at ease in Nature,
  Master of all or mistress of all, aplomb in the midst of irrational things,	  Master of all or mistress of all, aplomb in the midst of irrational things,	  Master of all or mistress of all, aplomb in the midst of irrational things,	  Master of all or mistress of all, aplomb in the midst of irrational things,
  Imbued as they, passive, receptive, silent as they,	  Imbued as they, passive, receptive, silent as they,	  Imbued as they, passive, receptive, silent as they,	  Imbued as they, passive, receptive, silent as they,
  Finding my occupation, poverty, notoriety, foibles, crimes, less	  Finding my occupation, poverty, notoriety, foibles, crimes, less	  Finding my occupation, poverty, notoriety, foibles, crimes, less	  Finding my occupation, poverty, notoriety, foibles, crimes, less
      important than I thought,	      important than I thought,	      important than I thought,	      important than I thought,
  Me toward the Mexican sea, or in the Mannahatta or the Tennessee,	  Me toward the Mexican sea, or in the Mannahatta or the Tennessee,	  Me toward the Mexican sea, or in the Mannahatta or the Tennessee,	  Me toward the Mexican sea, or in the Mannahatta or the Tennessee,
      or far north or inland,	      or far north or inland,	      or far north or inland,	      or far north or inland,
  A river man, or a man of the woods or of any farm-life of these	  A river man, or a man of the woods or of any farm-life of these	  A river man, or a man of the woods or of any farm-life of these	  A river man, or a man of the woods or of any farm-life of these
      States or of the coast, or the lakes or Kanada,	      States or of the coast, or the lakes or Kanada,	      States or of the coast, or the lakes or Kanada,	      States or of the coast, or the lakes or Kanada,
  Me wherever my life is lived, O to be self-balanced for contingencies,	  Me wherever my life is lived, O to be self-balanced for contingencies,	  Me wherever my life is lived, O to be self-balanced for contingencies,	  Me wherever my life is lived, O to be self-balanced for contingencies,
  To confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, accidents, rebuffs, as	  To confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, accidents, rebuffs, as	  To confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, accidents, rebuffs, as	  To confront night, storms, hunger, ridicule, accidents, rebuffs, as
      the trees and animals do.	      the trees and animals do.	      the trees and animals do.	      the trees and animals do.
			
			
			
			
Savantism	Savantism	Savantism	Savantism
			
  Thither as I look I see each result and glory retracing itself and	  Thither as I look I see each result and glory retracing itself and	  Thither as I look I see each result and glory retracing itself and	  Thither as I look I see each result and glory retracing itself and
      nestling close, always obligated,	      nestling close, always obligated,	      nestling close, always obligated,	      nestling close, always obligated,
  Thither hours, months, years--thither trades, compacts,	  Thither hours, months, years--thither trades, compacts,	  Thither hours, months, years--thither trades, compacts,	  Thither hours, months, years--thither trades, compacts,
      establishments, even the most minute,	      establishments, even the most minute,	      establishments, even the most minute,	      establishments, even the most minute,
  Thither every-day life, speech, utensils, politics, persons, estates;	  Thither every-day life, speech, utensils, politics, persons, estates;	  Thither every-day life, speech, utensils, politics, persons, estates;	  Thither every-day life, speech, utensils, politics, persons, estates;
  Thither we also, I with my leaves and songs, trustful, admirant,	  Thither we also, I with my leaves and songs, trustful, admirant,	  Thither we also, I with my leaves and songs, trustful, admirant,	  Thither we also, I with my leaves and songs, trustful, admirant,
  As a father to his father going takes his children along with him.	  As a father to his father going takes his children along with him.	  As a father to his father going takes his children along with him.	  As a father to his father going takes his children along with him.
			
			
			
			
The Ship Starting	The Ship Starting	The Ship Starting	The Ship Starting
			
  Lo, the unbounded sea,	  Lo, the unbounded sea,	  Lo, the unbounded sea,	  Lo, the unbounded sea,
  On its breast a ship starting, spreading all sails, carrying even	  On its breast a ship starting, spreading all sails, carrying even	  On its breast a ship starting, spreading all sails, carrying even	  On its breast a ship starting, spreading all sails, carrying even
      her moonsails.	      her moonsails.	      her moonsails.	      her moonsails.
  The pennant is flying aloft as she speeds she speeds so stately--	  The pennant is flying aloft as she speeds she speeds so stately--	  The pennant is flying aloft as she speeds she speeds so stately--	  The pennant is flying aloft as she speeds she speeds so stately--
      below emulous waves press forward,	      below emulous waves press forward,	      below emulous waves press forward,	      below emulous waves press forward,
  They surround the ship with shining curving motions and foam.	  They surround the ship with shining curving motions and foam.	  They surround the ship with shining curving motions and foam.	  They surround the ship with shining curving motions and foam.
			
			
			
			
I Hear America Singing	I Hear America Singing	I Hear America Singing	I Hear America Singing
			
  I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear,	  I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear,	  I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear,	  I hear America singing, the varied carols I hear,
  Those of mechanics, each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong,	  Those of mechanics, each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong,	  Those of mechanics, each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong,	  Those of mechanics, each one singing his as it should be blithe and strong,
  The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam,	  The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam,	  The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam,	  The carpenter singing his as he measures his plank or beam,
  The mason singing his as he makes ready for work, or leaves off work,	  The mason singing his as he makes ready for work, or leaves off work,	  The mason singing his as he makes ready for work, or leaves off work,	  The mason singing his as he makes ready for work, or leaves off work,
  The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat, the deckhand	  The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat, the deckhand	  The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat, the deckhand	  The boatman singing what belongs to him in his boat, the deckhand
      singing on the steamboat deck,	      singing on the steamboat deck,	      singing on the steamboat deck,	      singing on the steamboat deck,
  The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench, the hatter singing as	  The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench, the hatter singing as	  The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench, the hatter singing as	  The shoemaker singing as he sits on his bench, the hatter singing as
      he stands,	      he stands,	      he stands,	      he stands,
  The wood-cutter's song, the ploughboy's on his way in the morning,	  The wood-cutter's song, the ploughboy's on his way in the morning,	  The wood-cutter's song, the ploughboy's on his way in the morning,	  The wood-cutter's song, the ploughboy's on his way in the morning,
      or at noon intermission or at sundown,	      or at noon intermission or at sundown,	      or at noon intermission or at sundown,	      or at noon intermission or at sundown,
  The delicious singing of the mother, or of the young wife at work,	  The delicious singing of the mother, or of the young wife at work,	  The delicious singing of the mother, or of the young wife at work,	  The delicious singing of the mother, or of the young wife at work,
      or of the girl sewing or washing,	      or of the girl sewing or washing,	      or of the girl sewing or washing,	      or of the girl sewing or washing,
  Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else,	  Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else,	  Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else,	  Each singing what belongs to him or her and to none else,
  The day what belongs to the day--at night the party of young	  The day what belongs to the day--at night the party of young	  The day what belongs to the day--at night the party of young	  The day what belongs to the day--at night the party of young
      fellows, robust, friendly,	      fellows, robust, friendly,	      fellows, robust, friendly,	      fellows, robust, friendly,
  Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.	  Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.	  Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.	  Singing with open mouths their strong melodious songs.
			
			
			
			
What Place Is Besieged?	What Place Is Besieged?	What Place Is Besieged?	What Place Is Besieged?
			
  What place is besieged, and vainly tries to raise the siege?	  What place is besieged, and vainly tries to raise the siege?	  What place is besieged, and vainly tries to raise the siege?	  What place is besieged, and vainly tries to raise the siege?
  Lo, I send to that place a commander, swift, brave, immortal,	  Lo, I send to that place a commander, swift, brave, immortal,	  Lo, I send to that place a commander, swift, brave, immortal,	  Lo, I send to that place a commander, swift, brave, immortal,
  And with him horse and foot, and parks of artillery,	  And with him horse and foot, and parks of artillery,	  And with him horse and foot, and parks of artillery,	  And with him horse and foot, and parks of artillery,
  And artillery-men, the deadliest that ever fired gun.	  And artillery-men, the deadliest that ever fired gun.	  And artillery-men, the deadliest that ever fired gun.	  And artillery-men, the deadliest that ever fired gun.
			
			
			
			
Still Though the One I Sing	Still Though the One I Sing	Still Though the One I Sing	Still Though the One I Sing
			
  Still though the one I sing,	  Still though the one I sing,	  Still though the one I sing,	  Still though the one I sing,
  (One, yet of contradictions made,) I dedicate to Nationality,	  (One, yet of contradictions made,) I dedicate to Nationality,	  (One, yet of contradictions made,) I dedicate to Nationality,	  (One, yet of contradictions made,) I dedicate to Nationality,
  I leave in him revolt, (O latent right of insurrection! O	  I leave in him revolt, (O latent right of insurrection! O	  I leave in him revolt, (O latent right of insurrection! O	  I leave in him revolt, (O latent right of insurrection! O
      quenchless, indispensable fire!)	      quenchless, indispensable fire!)	      quenchless, indispensable fire!)	      quenchless, indispensable fire!)
			
			
			
			
Shut Not Your Doors	Shut Not Your Doors	Shut Not Your Doors	Shut Not Your Doors
			
  Shut not your doors to me proud libraries,	  Shut not your doors to me proud libraries,	  Shut not your doors to me proud libraries,	  Shut not your doors to me proud libraries,
  For that which was lacking on all your well-fill'd shelves, yet	  For that which was lacking on all your well-fill'd shelves, yet	  For that which was lacking on all your well-fill'd shelves, yet	  For that which was lacking on all your well-fill'd shelves, yet
      needed most, I bring,	      needed most, I bring,	      needed most, I bring,	      needed most, I bring,
  Forth from the war emerging, a book I have made,	  Forth from the war emerging, a book I have made,	  Forth from the war emerging, a book I have made,	  Forth from the war emerging, a book I have made,
  The words of my book nothing, the drift of it every thing,	  The words of my book nothing, the drift of it every thing,	  The words of my book nothing, the drift of it every thing,	  The words of my book nothing, the drift of it every thing,
  A book separate, not link'd with the rest nor felt by the intellect,	  A book separate, not link'd with the rest nor felt by the intellect,	  A book separate, not link'd with the rest nor felt by the intellect,	  A book separate, not link'd with the rest nor felt by the intellect,
  But you ye untold latencies will thrill to every page.	  But you ye untold latencies will thrill to every page.	  But you ye untold latencies will thrill to every page.	  But you ye untold latencies will thrill to every page.
			
			
			
			
Poets to Come	Poets to Come	Poets to Come	Poets to Come
			
  Poets to come! orators, singers, musicians to come!	  Poets to come! orators, singers, musicians to come!	  Poets to come! orators, singers, musicians to come!	  Poets to come! orators, singers, musicians to come!
  Not to-day is to justify me and answer what I am for,	  Not to-day is to justify me and answer what I am for,	  Not to-day is to justify me and answer what I am for,	  Not to-day is to justify me and answer what I am for,
  But you, a new brood, native, athletic, continental, greater than	  But you, a new brood, native, athletic, continental, greater than	  But you, a new brood, native, athletic, continental, greater than	  But you, a new brood, native, athletic, continental, greater than
      before known,	      before known,	      before known,	      before known,
  Arouse! for you must justify me.	  Arouse! for you must justify me.	  Arouse! for you must justify me.	  Arouse! for you must justify me.
			
  I myself but write one or two indicative words for the future,	  I myself but write one or two indicative words for the future,	  I myself but write one or two indicative words for the future,	  I myself but write one or two indicative words for the future,
  I but advance a moment only to wheel and hurry back in the darkness.	  I but advance a moment only to wheel and hurry back in the darkness.	  I but advance a moment only to wheel and hurry back in the darkness.	  I but advance a moment only to wheel and hurry back in the darkness.
			
  I am a man who, sauntering along without fully stopping, turns a	  I am a man who, sauntering along without fully stopping, turns a	  I am a man who, sauntering along without fully stopping, turns a	  I am a man who, sauntering along without fully stopping, turns a
      casual look upon you and then averts his face,	      casual look upon you and then averts his face,	      casual look upon you and then averts his face,	      casual look upon you and then averts his face,
  Leaving it to you to prove and define it,	  Leaving it to you to prove and define it,	  Leaving it to you to prove and define it,	  Leaving it to you to prove and define it,
  Expecting the main things from you.	  Expecting the main things from you.	  Expecting the main things from you.	  Expecting the main things from you.
			
			
			
			
To You	To You	To You	To You
			
  Stranger, if you passing meet me and desire to speak to me, why	  Stranger, if you passing meet me and desire to speak to me, why	  Stranger, if you passing meet me and desire to speak to me, why	  Stranger, if you passing meet me and desire to speak to me, why
      should you not speak to me?	      should you not speak to me?	      should you not speak to me?	      should you not speak to me?
  And why should I not speak to you?	  And why should I not speak to you?	  And why should I not speak to you?	  And why should I not speak to you?
			
			
			
			
Thou Reader	Thou Reader	Thou Reader	Thou Reader
			
  Thou reader throbbest life and pride and love the same as I,	  Thou reader throbbest life and pride and love the same as I,	  Thou reader throbbest life and pride and love the same as I,	  Thou reader throbbest life and pride and love the same as I,
  Therefore for thee the following chants.	  Therefore for thee the following chants.	  Therefore for thee the following chants.	  Therefore for thee the following chants.
			
			
			
			
BOOK II	BOOK II	BOOK II	BOOK II
			
			
Starting from Paumanok	Starting from Paumanok	Starting from Paumanok	Starting from Paumanok
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Starting from fish-shape Paumanok where I was born,	  Starting from fish-shape Paumanok where I was born,	  Starting from fish-shape Paumanok where I was born,	  Starting from fish-shape Paumanok where I was born,
  Well-begotten, and rais'd by a perfect mother,	  Well-begotten, and rais'd by a perfect mother,	  Well-begotten, and rais'd by a perfect mother,	  Well-begotten, and rais'd by a perfect mother,
  After roaming many lands, lover of populous pavements,	  After roaming many lands, lover of populous pavements,	  After roaming many lands, lover of populous pavements,	  After roaming many lands, lover of populous pavements,
  Dweller in Mannahatta my city, or on southern savannas,	  Dweller in Mannahatta my city, or on southern savannas,	  Dweller in Mannahatta my city, or on southern savannas,	  Dweller in Mannahatta my city, or on southern savannas,
  Or a soldier camp'd or carrying my knapsack and gun, or a miner	  Or a soldier camp'd or carrying my knapsack and gun, or a miner	  Or a soldier camp'd or carrying my knapsack and gun, or a miner	  Or a soldier camp'd or carrying my knapsack and gun, or a miner
      in California,	      in California,	      in California,	      in California,
  Or rude in my home in Dakota's woods, my diet meat, my drink from	  Or rude in my home in Dakota's woods, my diet meat, my drink from	  Or rude in my home in Dakota's woods, my diet meat, my drink from	  Or rude in my home in Dakota's woods, my diet meat, my drink from
      the spring,	      the spring,	      the spring,	      the spring,
  Or withdrawn to muse and meditate in some deep recess,	  Or withdrawn to muse and meditate in some deep recess,	  Or withdrawn to muse and meditate in some deep recess,	  Or withdrawn to muse and meditate in some deep recess,
  Far from the clank of crowds intervals passing rapt and happy,	  Far from the clank of crowds intervals passing rapt and happy,	  Far from the clank of crowds intervals passing rapt and happy,	  Far from the clank of crowds intervals passing rapt and happy,
  Aware of the fresh free giver the flowing Missouri, aware of	  Aware of the fresh free giver the flowing Missouri, aware of	  Aware of the fresh free giver the flowing Missouri, aware of	  Aware of the fresh free giver the flowing Missouri, aware of
      mighty Niagara,	      mighty Niagara,	      mighty Niagara,	      mighty Niagara,
  Aware of the buffalo herds grazing the plains, the hirsute and	  Aware of the buffalo herds grazing the plains, the hirsute and	  Aware of the buffalo herds grazing the plains, the hirsute and	  Aware of the buffalo herds grazing the plains, the hirsute and
      strong-breasted bull,	      strong-breasted bull,	      strong-breasted bull,	      strong-breasted bull,
  Of earth, rocks, Fifth-month flowers experienced, stars, rain, snow,	  Of earth, rocks, Fifth-month flowers experienced, stars, rain, snow,	  Of earth, rocks, Fifth-month flowers experienced, stars, rain, snow,	  Of earth, rocks, Fifth-month flowers experienced, stars, rain, snow,
      my amaze,	      my amaze,	      my amaze,	      my amaze,
  Having studied the mocking-bird's tones and the flight of the	  Having studied the mocking-bird's tones and the flight of the	  Having studied the mocking-bird's tones and the flight of the	  Having studied the mocking-bird's tones and the flight of the
      mountain-hawk,	      mountain-hawk,	      mountain-hawk,	      mountain-hawk,
  And heard at dawn the unrivall'd one, the hermit thrush from the	  And heard at dawn the unrivall'd one, the hermit thrush from the	  And heard at dawn the unrivall'd one, the hermit thrush from the	  And heard at dawn the unrivall'd one, the hermit thrush from the
      swamp-cedars,	      swamp-cedars,	      swamp-cedars,	      swamp-cedars,
  Solitary, singing in the West, I strike up for a New World.	  Solitary, singing in the West, I strike up for a New World.	  Solitary, singing in the West, I strike up for a New World.	  Solitary, singing in the West, I strike up for a New World.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Victory, union, faith, identity, time,	  Victory, union, faith, identity, time,	  Victory, union, faith, identity, time,	  Victory, union, faith, identity, time,
  The indissoluble compacts, riches, mystery,	  The indissoluble compacts, riches, mystery,	  The indissoluble compacts, riches, mystery,	  The indissoluble compacts, riches, mystery,
  Eternal progress, the kosmos, and the modern reports.	  Eternal progress, the kosmos, and the modern reports.	  Eternal progress, the kosmos, and the modern reports.	  Eternal progress, the kosmos, and the modern reports.
  This then is life,	  This then is life,	  This then is life,	  This then is life,
  Here is what has come to the surface after so many throes and convulsions.	  Here is what has come to the surface after so many throes and convulsions.	  Here is what has come to the surface after so many throes and convulsions.	  Here is what has come to the surface after so many throes and convulsions.
			
  How curious! how real!	  How curious! how real!	  How curious! how real!	  How curious! how real!
  Underfoot the divine soil, overhead the sun.	  Underfoot the divine soil, overhead the sun.	  Underfoot the divine soil, overhead the sun.	  Underfoot the divine soil, overhead the sun.
			
  See revolving the globe,	  See revolving the globe,	  See revolving the globe,	  See revolving the globe,
  The ancestor-continents away group'd together,	  The ancestor-continents away group'd together,	  The ancestor-continents away group'd together,	  The ancestor-continents away group'd together,
  The present and future continents north and south, with the isthmus	  The present and future continents north and south, with the isthmus	  The present and future continents north and south, with the isthmus	  The present and future continents north and south, with the isthmus
      between.	      between.	      between.	      between.
			
  See, vast trackless spaces,	  See, vast trackless spaces,	  See, vast trackless spaces,	  See, vast trackless spaces,
  As in a dream they change, they swiftly fill,	  As in a dream they change, they swiftly fill,	  As in a dream they change, they swiftly fill,	  As in a dream they change, they swiftly fill,
  Countless masses debouch upon them,	  Countless masses debouch upon them,	  Countless masses debouch upon them,	  Countless masses debouch upon them,
  They are now cover'd with the foremost people, arts, institutions, known.	  They are now cover'd with the foremost people, arts, institutions, known.	  They are now cover'd with the foremost people, arts, institutions, known.	  They are now cover'd with the foremost people, arts, institutions, known.
			
  See, projected through time,	  See, projected through time,	  See, projected through time,	  See, projected through time,
  For me an audience interminable.	  For me an audience interminable.	  For me an audience interminable.	  For me an audience interminable.
			
  With firm and regular step they wend, they never stop,	  With firm and regular step they wend, they never stop,	  With firm and regular step they wend, they never stop,	  With firm and regular step they wend, they never stop,
  Successions of men, Americanos, a hundred millions,	  Successions of men, Americanos, a hundred millions,	  Successions of men, Americanos, a hundred millions,	  Successions of men, Americanos, a hundred millions,
  One generation playing its part and passing on,	  One generation playing its part and passing on,	  One generation playing its part and passing on,	  One generation playing its part and passing on,
  Another generation playing its part and passing on in its turn,	  Another generation playing its part and passing on in its turn,	  Another generation playing its part and passing on in its turn,	  Another generation playing its part and passing on in its turn,
  With faces turn'd sideways or backward towards me to listen,	  With faces turn'd sideways or backward towards me to listen,	  With faces turn'd sideways or backward towards me to listen,	  With faces turn'd sideways or backward towards me to listen,
  With eyes retrospective towards me.	  With eyes retrospective towards me.	  With eyes retrospective towards me.	  With eyes retrospective towards me.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Americanos! conquerors! marches humanitarian!	  Americanos! conquerors! marches humanitarian!	  Americanos! conquerors! marches humanitarian!	  Americanos! conquerors! marches humanitarian!
  Foremost! century marches! Libertad! masses!	  Foremost! century marches! Libertad! masses!	  Foremost! century marches! Libertad! masses!	  Foremost! century marches! Libertad! masses!
  For you a programme of chants.	  For you a programme of chants.	  For you a programme of chants.	  For you a programme of chants.
			
  Chants of the prairies,	  Chants of the prairies,	  Chants of the prairies,	  Chants of the prairies,
  Chants of the long-running Mississippi, and down to the Mexican sea,	  Chants of the long-running Mississippi, and down to the Mexican sea,	  Chants of the long-running Mississippi, and down to the Mexican sea,	  Chants of the long-running Mississippi, and down to the Mexican sea,
  Chants of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin and Minnesota,	  Chants of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin and Minnesota,	  Chants of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin and Minnesota,	  Chants of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin and Minnesota,
  Chants going forth from the centre from Kansas, and thence equidistant,	  Chants going forth from the centre from Kansas, and thence equidistant,	  Chants going forth from the centre from Kansas, and thence equidistant,	  Chants going forth from the centre from Kansas, and thence equidistant,
  Shooting in pulses of fire ceaseless to vivify all.	  Shooting in pulses of fire ceaseless to vivify all.	  Shooting in pulses of fire ceaseless to vivify all.	  Shooting in pulses of fire ceaseless to vivify all.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Take my leaves America, take them South and take them North,	  Take my leaves America, take them South and take them North,	  Take my leaves America, take them South and take them North,	  Take my leaves America, take them South and take them North,
  Make welcome for them everywhere, for they are your own off-spring,	  Make welcome for them everywhere, for they are your own off-spring,	  Make welcome for them everywhere, for they are your own off-spring,	  Make welcome for them everywhere, for they are your own off-spring,
  Surround them East and West, for they would surround you,	  Surround them East and West, for they would surround you,	  Surround them East and West, for they would surround you,	  Surround them East and West, for they would surround you,
  And you precedents, connect lovingly with them, for they connect	  And you precedents, connect lovingly with them, for they connect	  And you precedents, connect lovingly with them, for they connect	  And you precedents, connect lovingly with them, for they connect
      lovingly with you.	      lovingly with you.	      lovingly with you.	      lovingly with you.
			
  I conn'd old times,	  I conn'd old times,	  I conn'd old times,	  I conn'd old times,
  I sat studying at the feet of the great masters,	  I sat studying at the feet of the great masters,	  I sat studying at the feet of the great masters,	  I sat studying at the feet of the great masters,
  Now if eligible O that the great masters might return and study me.	  Now if eligible O that the great masters might return and study me.	  Now if eligible O that the great masters might return and study me.	  Now if eligible O that the great masters might return and study me.
			
  In the name of these States shall I scorn the antique?	  In the name of these States shall I scorn the antique?	  In the name of these States shall I scorn the antique?	  In the name of these States shall I scorn the antique?
  Why these are the children of the antique to justify it.	  Why these are the children of the antique to justify it.	  Why these are the children of the antique to justify it.	  Why these are the children of the antique to justify it.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Dead poets, philosophs, priests,	  Dead poets, philosophs, priests,	  Dead poets, philosophs, priests,	  Dead poets, philosophs, priests,
  Martyrs, artists, inventors, governments long since,	  Martyrs, artists, inventors, governments long since,	  Martyrs, artists, inventors, governments long since,	  Martyrs, artists, inventors, governments long since,
  Language-shapers on other shores,	  Language-shapers on other shores,	  Language-shapers on other shores,	  Language-shapers on other shores,
  Nations once powerful, now reduced, withdrawn, or desolate,	  Nations once powerful, now reduced, withdrawn, or desolate,	  Nations once powerful, now reduced, withdrawn, or desolate,	  Nations once powerful, now reduced, withdrawn, or desolate,
  I dare not proceed till I respectfully credit what you have left	  I dare not proceed till I respectfully credit what you have left	  I dare not proceed till I respectfully credit what you have left	  I dare not proceed till I respectfully credit what you have left
      wafted hither,	      wafted hither,	      wafted hither,	      wafted hither,
  I have perused it, own it is admirable, (moving awhile among it,)	  I have perused it, own it is admirable, (moving awhile among it,)	  I have perused it, own it is admirable, (moving awhile among it,)	  I have perused it, own it is admirable, (moving awhile among it,)
  Think nothing can ever be greater, nothing can ever deserve more	  Think nothing can ever be greater, nothing can ever deserve more	  Think nothing can ever be greater, nothing can ever deserve more	  Think nothing can ever be greater, nothing can ever deserve more
      than it deserves,	      than it deserves,	      than it deserves,	      than it deserves,
  Regarding it all intently a long while, then dismissing it,	  Regarding it all intently a long while, then dismissing it,	  Regarding it all intently a long while, then dismissing it,	  Regarding it all intently a long while, then dismissing it,
  I stand in my place with my own day here.	  I stand in my place with my own day here.	  I stand in my place with my own day here.	  I stand in my place with my own day here.
			
  Here lands female and male,	  Here lands female and male,	  Here lands female and male,	  Here lands female and male,
  Here the heir-ship and heiress-ship of the world, here the flame of	  Here the heir-ship and heiress-ship of the world, here the flame of	  Here the heir-ship and heiress-ship of the world, here the flame of	  Here the heir-ship and heiress-ship of the world, here the flame of
      materials,	      materials,	      materials,	      materials,
  Here spirituality the translatress, the openly-avow'd,	  Here spirituality the translatress, the openly-avow'd,	  Here spirituality the translatress, the openly-avow'd,	  Here spirituality the translatress, the openly-avow'd,
  The ever-tending, the finale of visible forms,	  The ever-tending, the finale of visible forms,	  The ever-tending, the finale of visible forms,	  The ever-tending, the finale of visible forms,
  The satisfier, after due long-waiting now advancing,	  The satisfier, after due long-waiting now advancing,	  The satisfier, after due long-waiting now advancing,	  The satisfier, after due long-waiting now advancing,
  Yes here comes my mistress the soul.	  Yes here comes my mistress the soul.	  Yes here comes my mistress the soul.	  Yes here comes my mistress the soul.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  The soul,	  The soul,	  The soul,	  The soul,
  Forever and forever--longer than soil is brown and solid--longer	  Forever and forever--longer than soil is brown and solid--longer	  Forever and forever--longer than soil is brown and solid--longer	  Forever and forever--longer than soil is brown and solid--longer
      than water ebbs and flows.	      than water ebbs and flows.	      than water ebbs and flows.	      than water ebbs and flows.
  I will make the poems of materials, for I think they are to be the	  I will make the poems of materials, for I think they are to be the	  I will make the poems of materials, for I think they are to be the	  I will make the poems of materials, for I think they are to be the
      most spiritual poems,	      most spiritual poems,	      most spiritual poems,	      most spiritual poems,
  And I will make the poems of my body and of mortality,	  And I will make the poems of my body and of mortality,	  And I will make the poems of my body and of mortality,	  And I will make the poems of my body and of mortality,
  For I think I shall then supply myself with the poems of my soul and	  For I think I shall then supply myself with the poems of my soul and	  For I think I shall then supply myself with the poems of my soul and	  For I think I shall then supply myself with the poems of my soul and
      of immortality.	      of immortality.	      of immortality.	      of immortality.
			
  I will make a song for these States that no one State may under any	  I will make a song for these States that no one State may under any	  I will make a song for these States that no one State may under any	  I will make a song for these States that no one State may under any
      circumstances be subjected to another State,	      circumstances be subjected to another State,	      circumstances be subjected to another State,	      circumstances be subjected to another State,
  And I will make a song that there shall be comity by day and by	  And I will make a song that there shall be comity by day and by	  And I will make a song that there shall be comity by day and by	  And I will make a song that there shall be comity by day and by
      night between all the States, and between any two of them,	      night between all the States, and between any two of them,	      night between all the States, and between any two of them,	      night between all the States, and between any two of them,
  And I will make a song for the ears of the President, full of	  And I will make a song for the ears of the President, full of	  And I will make a song for the ears of the President, full of	  And I will make a song for the ears of the President, full of
      weapons with menacing points,	      weapons with menacing points,	      weapons with menacing points,	      weapons with menacing points,
  And behind the weapons countless dissatisfied faces;	  And behind the weapons countless dissatisfied faces;	  And behind the weapons countless dissatisfied faces;	  And behind the weapons countless dissatisfied faces;
  And a song make I of the One form'd out of all,	  And a song make I of the One form'd out of all,	  And a song make I of the One form'd out of all,	  And a song make I of the One form'd out of all,
  The fang'd and glittering One whose head is over all,	  The fang'd and glittering One whose head is over all,	  The fang'd and glittering One whose head is over all,	  The fang'd and glittering One whose head is over all,
  Resolute warlike One including and over all,	  Resolute warlike One including and over all,	  Resolute warlike One including and over all,	  Resolute warlike One including and over all,
  (However high the head of any else that head is over all.)	  (However high the head of any else that head is over all.)	  (However high the head of any else that head is over all.)	  (However high the head of any else that head is over all.)
			
  I will acknowledge contemporary lands,	  I will acknowledge contemporary lands,	  I will acknowledge contemporary lands,	  I will acknowledge contemporary lands,
  I will trail the whole geography of the globe and salute courteously	  I will trail the whole geography of the globe and salute courteously	  I will trail the whole geography of the globe and salute courteously	  I will trail the whole geography of the globe and salute courteously
      every city large and small,	      every city large and small,	      every city large and small,	      every city large and small,
  And employments! I will put in my poems that with you is heroism	  And employments! I will put in my poems that with you is heroism	  And employments! I will put in my poems that with you is heroism	  And employments! I will put in my poems that with you is heroism
      upon land and sea,	      upon land and sea,	      upon land and sea,	      upon land and sea,
  And I will report all heroism from an American point of view.	  And I will report all heroism from an American point of view.	  And I will report all heroism from an American point of view.	  And I will report all heroism from an American point of view.
			
  I will sing the song of companionship,	  I will sing the song of companionship,	  I will sing the song of companionship,	  I will sing the song of companionship,
  I will show what alone must finally compact these,	  I will show what alone must finally compact these,	  I will show what alone must finally compact these,	  I will show what alone must finally compact these,
  I believe these are to found their own ideal of manly love,	  I believe these are to found their own ideal of manly love,	  I believe these are to found their own ideal of manly love,	  I believe these are to found their own ideal of manly love,
      indicating it in me,	      indicating it in me,	      indicating it in me,	      indicating it in me,
  I will therefore let flame from me the burning fires that were	  I will therefore let flame from me the burning fires that were	  I will therefore let flame from me the burning fires that were	  I will therefore let flame from me the burning fires that were
      threatening to consume me,	      threatening to consume me,	      threatening to consume me,	      threatening to consume me,
  I will lift what has too long kept down those smouldering fires,	  I will lift what has too long kept down those smouldering fires,	  I will lift what has too long kept down those smouldering fires,	  I will lift what has too long kept down those smouldering fires,
  I will give them complete abandonment,	  I will give them complete abandonment,	  I will give them complete abandonment,	  I will give them complete abandonment,
  I will write the evangel-poem of comrades and of love,	  I will write the evangel-poem of comrades and of love,	  I will write the evangel-poem of comrades and of love,	  I will write the evangel-poem of comrades and of love,
  For who but I should understand love with all its sorrow and joy?	  For who but I should understand love with all its sorrow and joy?	  For who but I should understand love with all its sorrow and joy?	  For who but I should understand love with all its sorrow and joy?
  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?	  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?	  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?	  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  I am the credulous man of qualities, ages, races,	  I am the credulous man of qualities, ages, races,	  I am the credulous man of qualities, ages, races,	  I am the credulous man of qualities, ages, races,
  I advance from the people in their own spirit,	  I advance from the people in their own spirit,	  I advance from the people in their own spirit,	  I advance from the people in their own spirit,
  Here is what sings unrestricted faith.	  Here is what sings unrestricted faith.	  Here is what sings unrestricted faith.	  Here is what sings unrestricted faith.
			
  Omnes! omnes! let others ignore what they may,	  Omnes! omnes! let others ignore what they may,	  Omnes! omnes! let others ignore what they may,	  Omnes! omnes! let others ignore what they may,
  I make the poem of evil also, I commemorate that part also,	  I make the poem of evil also, I commemorate that part also,	  I make the poem of evil also, I commemorate that part also,	  I make the poem of evil also, I commemorate that part also,
  I am myself just as much evil as good, and my nation is--and I say	  I am myself just as much evil as good, and my nation is--and I say	  I am myself just as much evil as good, and my nation is--and I say	  I am myself just as much evil as good, and my nation is--and I say
      there is in fact no evil,	      there is in fact no evil,	      there is in fact no evil,	      there is in fact no evil,
  (Or if there is I say it is just as important to you, to the land or	  (Or if there is I say it is just as important to you, to the land or	  (Or if there is I say it is just as important to you, to the land or	  (Or if there is I say it is just as important to you, to the land or
      to me, as any thing else.)	      to me, as any thing else.)	      to me, as any thing else.)	      to me, as any thing else.)
			
  I too, following many and follow'd by many, inaugurate a religion, I	  I too, following many and follow'd by many, inaugurate a religion, I	  I too, following many and follow'd by many, inaugurate a religion, I	  I too, following many and follow'd by many, inaugurate a religion, I
      descend into the arena,	      descend into the arena,	      descend into the arena,	      descend into the arena,
  (It may be I am destin'd to utter the loudest cries there, the	  (It may be I am destin'd to utter the loudest cries there, the	  (It may be I am destin'd to utter the loudest cries there, the	  (It may be I am destin'd to utter the loudest cries there, the
      winner's pealing shouts,	      winner's pealing shouts,	      winner's pealing shouts,	      winner's pealing shouts,
  Who knows? they may rise from me yet, and soar above every thing.)	  Who knows? they may rise from me yet, and soar above every thing.)	  Who knows? they may rise from me yet, and soar above every thing.)	  Who knows? they may rise from me yet, and soar above every thing.)
			
  Each is not for its own sake,	  Each is not for its own sake,	  Each is not for its own sake,	  Each is not for its own sake,
  I say the whole earth and all the stars in the sky are for religion's sake.	  I say the whole earth and all the stars in the sky are for religion's sake.	  I say the whole earth and all the stars in the sky are for religion's sake.	  I say the whole earth and all the stars in the sky are for religion's sake.
			
  I say no man has ever yet been half devout enough,	  I say no man has ever yet been half devout enough,	  I say no man has ever yet been half devout enough,	  I say no man has ever yet been half devout enough,
  None has ever yet adored or worship'd half enough,	  None has ever yet adored or worship'd half enough,	  None has ever yet adored or worship'd half enough,	  None has ever yet adored or worship'd half enough,
  None has begun to think how divine he himself is, and how certain	  None has begun to think how divine he himself is, and how certain	  None has begun to think how divine he himself is, and how certain	  None has begun to think how divine he himself is, and how certain
      the future is.	      the future is.	      the future is.	      the future is.
			
  I say that the real and permanent grandeur of these States must be	  I say that the real and permanent grandeur of these States must be	  I say that the real and permanent grandeur of these States must be	  I say that the real and permanent grandeur of these States must be
      their religion,	      their religion,	      their religion,	      their religion,
  Otherwise there is just no real and permanent grandeur;	  Otherwise there is just no real and permanent grandeur;	  Otherwise there is just no real and permanent grandeur;	  Otherwise there is just no real and permanent grandeur;
  (Nor character nor life worthy the name without religion,	  (Nor character nor life worthy the name without religion,	  (Nor character nor life worthy the name without religion,	  (Nor character nor life worthy the name without religion,
  Nor land nor man or woman without religion.)	  Nor land nor man or woman without religion.)	  Nor land nor man or woman without religion.)	  Nor land nor man or woman without religion.)
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  What are you doing young man?	  What are you doing young man?	  What are you doing young man?	  What are you doing young man?
  Are you so earnest, so given up to literature, science, art, amours?	  Are you so earnest, so given up to literature, science, art, amours?	  Are you so earnest, so given up to literature, science, art, amours?	  Are you so earnest, so given up to literature, science, art, amours?
  These ostensible realities, politics, points?	  These ostensible realities, politics, points?	  These ostensible realities, politics, points?	  These ostensible realities, politics, points?
  Your ambition or business whatever it may be?	  Your ambition or business whatever it may be?	  Your ambition or business whatever it may be?	  Your ambition or business whatever it may be?
			
  It is well--against such I say not a word, I am their poet also,	  It is well--against such I say not a word, I am their poet also,	  It is well--against such I say not a word, I am their poet also,	  It is well--against such I say not a word, I am their poet also,
  But behold! such swiftly subside, burnt up for religion's sake,	  But behold! such swiftly subside, burnt up for religion's sake,	  But behold! such swiftly subside, burnt up for religion's sake,	  But behold! such swiftly subside, burnt up for religion's sake,
  For not all matter is fuel to heat, impalpable flame, the essential	  For not all matter is fuel to heat, impalpable flame, the essential	  For not all matter is fuel to heat, impalpable flame, the essential	  For not all matter is fuel to heat, impalpable flame, the essential
      life of the earth,	      life of the earth,	      life of the earth,	      life of the earth,
  Any more than such are to religion.	  Any more than such are to religion.	  Any more than such are to religion.	  Any more than such are to religion.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  What do you seek so pensive and silent?	  What do you seek so pensive and silent?	  What do you seek so pensive and silent?	  What do you seek so pensive and silent?
  What do you need camerado?	  What do you need camerado?	  What do you need camerado?	  What do you need camerado?
  Dear son do you think it is love?	  Dear son do you think it is love?	  Dear son do you think it is love?	  Dear son do you think it is love?
			
  Listen dear son--listen America, daughter or son,	  Listen dear son--listen America, daughter or son,	  Listen dear son--listen America, daughter or son,	  Listen dear son--listen America, daughter or son,
  It is a painful thing to love a man or woman to excess, and yet it	  It is a painful thing to love a man or woman to excess, and yet it	  It is a painful thing to love a man or woman to excess, and yet it	  It is a painful thing to love a man or woman to excess, and yet it
      satisfies, it is great,	      satisfies, it is great,	      satisfies, it is great,	      satisfies, it is great,
  But there is something else very great, it makes the whole coincide,	  But there is something else very great, it makes the whole coincide,	  But there is something else very great, it makes the whole coincide,	  But there is something else very great, it makes the whole coincide,
  It, magnificent, beyond materials, with continuous hands sweeps and	  It, magnificent, beyond materials, with continuous hands sweeps and	  It, magnificent, beyond materials, with continuous hands sweeps and	  It, magnificent, beyond materials, with continuous hands sweeps and
      provides for all.	      provides for all.	      provides for all.	      provides for all.
			
       10	       10	       10	       10
  Know you, solely to drop in the earth the germs of a greater religion,	  Know you, solely to drop in the earth the germs of a greater religion,	  Know you, solely to drop in the earth the germs of a greater religion,	  Know you, solely to drop in the earth the germs of a greater religion,
  The following chants each for its kind I sing.	  The following chants each for its kind I sing.	  The following chants each for its kind I sing.	  The following chants each for its kind I sing.
			
  My comrade!	  My comrade!	  My comrade!	  My comrade!
  For you to share with me two greatnesses, and a third one rising	  For you to share with me two greatnesses, and a third one rising	  For you to share with me two greatnesses, and a third one rising	  For you to share with me two greatnesses, and a third one rising
      inclusive and more resplendent,	      inclusive and more resplendent,	      inclusive and more resplendent,	      inclusive and more resplendent,
  The greatness of Love and Democracy, and the greatness of Religion.	  The greatness of Love and Democracy, and the greatness of Religion.	  The greatness of Love and Democracy, and the greatness of Religion.	  The greatness of Love and Democracy, and the greatness of Religion.
			
  Melange mine own, the unseen and the seen,	  Melange mine own, the unseen and the seen,	  Melange mine own, the unseen and the seen,	  Melange mine own, the unseen and the seen,
  Mysterious ocean where the streams empty,	  Mysterious ocean where the streams empty,	  Mysterious ocean where the streams empty,	  Mysterious ocean where the streams empty,
  Prophetic spirit of materials shifting and flickering around me,	  Prophetic spirit of materials shifting and flickering around me,	  Prophetic spirit of materials shifting and flickering around me,	  Prophetic spirit of materials shifting and flickering around me,
  Living beings, identities now doubtless near us in the air that we	  Living beings, identities now doubtless near us in the air that we	  Living beings, identities now doubtless near us in the air that we	  Living beings, identities now doubtless near us in the air that we
      know not of,	      know not of,	      know not of,	      know not of,
  Contact daily and hourly that will not release me,	  Contact daily and hourly that will not release me,	  Contact daily and hourly that will not release me,	  Contact daily and hourly that will not release me,
  These selecting, these in hints demanded of me.	  These selecting, these in hints demanded of me.	  These selecting, these in hints demanded of me.	  These selecting, these in hints demanded of me.
			
  Not he with a daily kiss onward from childhood kissing me,	  Not he with a daily kiss onward from childhood kissing me,	  Not he with a daily kiss onward from childhood kissing me,	  Not he with a daily kiss onward from childhood kissing me,
  Has winded and twisted around me that which holds me to him,	  Has winded and twisted around me that which holds me to him,	  Has winded and twisted around me that which holds me to him,	  Has winded and twisted around me that which holds me to him,
  Any more than I am held to the heavens and all the spiritual world,	  Any more than I am held to the heavens and all the spiritual world,	  Any more than I am held to the heavens and all the spiritual world,	  Any more than I am held to the heavens and all the spiritual world,
  After what they have done to me, suggesting themes.	  After what they have done to me, suggesting themes.	  After what they have done to me, suggesting themes.	  After what they have done to me, suggesting themes.
			
  O such themes--equalities! O divine average!	  O such themes--equalities! O divine average!	  O such themes--equalities! O divine average!	  O such themes--equalities! O divine average!
  Warblings under the sun, usher'd as now, or at noon, or setting,	  Warblings under the sun, usher'd as now, or at noon, or setting,	  Warblings under the sun, usher'd as now, or at noon, or setting,	  Warblings under the sun, usher'd as now, or at noon, or setting,
  Strains musical flowing through ages, now reaching hither,	  Strains musical flowing through ages, now reaching hither,	  Strains musical flowing through ages, now reaching hither,	  Strains musical flowing through ages, now reaching hither,
  I take to your reckless and composite chords, add to them, and	  I take to your reckless and composite chords, add to them, and	  I take to your reckless and composite chords, add to them, and	  I take to your reckless and composite chords, add to them, and
      cheerfully pass them forward.	      cheerfully pass them forward.	      cheerfully pass them forward.	      cheerfully pass them forward.
			
       11	       11	       11	       11
  As I have walk'd in Alabama my morning walk,	  As I have walk'd in Alabama my morning walk,	  As I have walk'd in Alabama my morning walk,	  As I have walk'd in Alabama my morning walk,
  I have seen where the she-bird the mocking-bird sat on her nest in	  I have seen where the she-bird the mocking-bird sat on her nest in	  I have seen where the she-bird the mocking-bird sat on her nest in	  I have seen where the she-bird the mocking-bird sat on her nest in
      the briers hatching her brood.	      the briers hatching her brood.	      the briers hatching her brood.	      the briers hatching her brood.
			
  I have seen the he-bird also,	  I have seen the he-bird also,	  I have seen the he-bird also,	  I have seen the he-bird also,
  I have paus'd to hear him near at hand inflating his throat and	  I have paus'd to hear him near at hand inflating his throat and	  I have paus'd to hear him near at hand inflating his throat and	  I have paus'd to hear him near at hand inflating his throat and
      joyfully singing.	      joyfully singing.	      joyfully singing.	      joyfully singing.
			
  And while I paus'd it came to me that what he really sang for was	  And while I paus'd it came to me that what he really sang for was	  And while I paus'd it came to me that what he really sang for was	  And while I paus'd it came to me that what he really sang for was
      not there only,	      not there only,	      not there only,	      not there only,
  Nor for his mate nor himself only, nor all sent back by the echoes,	  Nor for his mate nor himself only, nor all sent back by the echoes,	  Nor for his mate nor himself only, nor all sent back by the echoes,	  Nor for his mate nor himself only, nor all sent back by the echoes,
  But subtle, clandestine, away beyond,	  But subtle, clandestine, away beyond,	  But subtle, clandestine, away beyond,	  But subtle, clandestine, away beyond,
  A charge transmitted and gift occult for those being born.	  A charge transmitted and gift occult for those being born.	  A charge transmitted and gift occult for those being born.	  A charge transmitted and gift occult for those being born.
			
       12	       12	       12	       12
  Democracy! near at hand to you a throat is now inflating itself and	  Democracy! near at hand to you a throat is now inflating itself and	  Democracy! near at hand to you a throat is now inflating itself and	  Democracy! near at hand to you a throat is now inflating itself and
      joyfully singing.	      joyfully singing.	      joyfully singing.	      joyfully singing.
			
  Ma femme! for the brood beyond us and of us,	  Ma femme! for the brood beyond us and of us,	  Ma femme! for the brood beyond us and of us,	  Ma femme! for the brood beyond us and of us,
  For those who belong here and those to come,	  For those who belong here and those to come,	  For those who belong here and those to come,	  For those who belong here and those to come,
  I exultant to be ready for them will now shake out carols stronger	  I exultant to be ready for them will now shake out carols stronger	  I exultant to be ready for them will now shake out carols stronger	  I exultant to be ready for them will now shake out carols stronger
      and haughtier than have ever yet been heard upon earth.	      and haughtier than have ever yet been heard upon earth.	      and haughtier than have ever yet been heard upon earth.	      and haughtier than have ever yet been heard upon earth.
			
  I will make the songs of passion to give them their way,	  I will make the songs of passion to give them their way,	  I will make the songs of passion to give them their way,	  I will make the songs of passion to give them their way,
  And your songs outlaw'd offenders, for I scan you with kindred eyes,	  And your songs outlaw'd offenders, for I scan you with kindred eyes,	  And your songs outlaw'd offenders, for I scan you with kindred eyes,	  And your songs outlaw'd offenders, for I scan you with kindred eyes,
      and carry you with me the same as any.	      and carry you with me the same as any.	      and carry you with me the same as any.	      and carry you with me the same as any.
			
  I will make the true poem of riches,	  I will make the true poem of riches,	  I will make the true poem of riches,	  I will make the true poem of riches,
  To earn for the body and the mind whatever adheres and goes forward	  To earn for the body and the mind whatever adheres and goes forward	  To earn for the body and the mind whatever adheres and goes forward	  To earn for the body and the mind whatever adheres and goes forward
      and is not dropt by death;	      and is not dropt by death;	      and is not dropt by death;	      and is not dropt by death;
  I will effuse egotism and show it underlying all, and I will be the	  I will effuse egotism and show it underlying all, and I will be the	  I will effuse egotism and show it underlying all, and I will be the	  I will effuse egotism and show it underlying all, and I will be the
      bard of personality,	      bard of personality,	      bard of personality,	      bard of personality,
  And I will show of male and female that either is but the equal of	  And I will show of male and female that either is but the equal of	  And I will show of male and female that either is but the equal of	  And I will show of male and female that either is but the equal of
      the other,	      the other,	      the other,	      the other,
  And sexual organs and acts! do you concentrate in me, for I am determin'd	  And sexual organs and acts! do you concentrate in me, for I am determin'd	  And sexual organs and acts! do you concentrate in me, for I am determin'd	  And sexual organs and acts! do you concentrate in me, for I am determin'd
      to tell you with courageous clear voice to prove you illustrious,	      to tell you with courageous clear voice to prove you illustrious,	      to tell you with courageous clear voice to prove you illustrious,	      to tell you with courageous clear voice to prove you illustrious,
  And I will show that there is no imperfection in the present, and	  And I will show that there is no imperfection in the present, and	  And I will show that there is no imperfection in the present, and	  And I will show that there is no imperfection in the present, and
      can be none in the future,	      can be none in the future,	      can be none in the future,	      can be none in the future,
  And I will show that whatever happens to anybody it may be turn'd to	  And I will show that whatever happens to anybody it may be turn'd to	  And I will show that whatever happens to anybody it may be turn'd to	  And I will show that whatever happens to anybody it may be turn'd to
      beautiful results,	      beautiful results,	      beautiful results,	      beautiful results,
  And I will show that nothing can happen more beautiful than death,	  And I will show that nothing can happen more beautiful than death,	  And I will show that nothing can happen more beautiful than death,	  And I will show that nothing can happen more beautiful than death,
  And I will thread a thread through my poems that time and events are	  And I will thread a thread through my poems that time and events are	  And I will thread a thread through my poems that time and events are	  And I will thread a thread through my poems that time and events are
      compact,	      compact,	      compact,	      compact,
  And that all the things of the universe are perfect miracles, each	  And that all the things of the universe are perfect miracles, each	  And that all the things of the universe are perfect miracles, each	  And that all the things of the universe are perfect miracles, each
      as profound as any.	      as profound as any.	      as profound as any.	      as profound as any.
			
  I will not make poems with reference to parts,	  I will not make poems with reference to parts,	  I will not make poems with reference to parts,	  I will not make poems with reference to parts,
  But I will make poems, songs, thoughts, with reference to ensemble,	  But I will make poems, songs, thoughts, with reference to ensemble,	  But I will make poems, songs, thoughts, with reference to ensemble,	  But I will make poems, songs, thoughts, with reference to ensemble,
  And I will not sing with reference to a day, but with reference to	  And I will not sing with reference to a day, but with reference to	  And I will not sing with reference to a day, but with reference to	  And I will not sing with reference to a day, but with reference to
      all days,	      all days,	      all days,	      all days,
  And I will not make a poem nor the least part of a poem but has	  And I will not make a poem nor the least part of a poem but has	  And I will not make a poem nor the least part of a poem but has	  And I will not make a poem nor the least part of a poem but has
      reference to the soul,	      reference to the soul,	      reference to the soul,	      reference to the soul,
  Because having look'd at the objects of the universe, I find there	  Because having look'd at the objects of the universe, I find there	  Because having look'd at the objects of the universe, I find there	  Because having look'd at the objects of the universe, I find there
      is no one nor any particle of one but has reference to the soul.	      is no one nor any particle of one but has reference to the soul.	      is no one nor any particle of one but has reference to the soul.	      is no one nor any particle of one but has reference to the soul.
			
       13	       13	       13	       13
  Was somebody asking to see the soul?	  Was somebody asking to see the soul?	  Was somebody asking to see the soul?	  Was somebody asking to see the soul?
  See, your own shape and countenance, persons, substances, beasts,	  See, your own shape and countenance, persons, substances, beasts,	  See, your own shape and countenance, persons, substances, beasts,	  See, your own shape and countenance, persons, substances, beasts,
      the trees, the running rivers, the rocks and sands.	      the trees, the running rivers, the rocks and sands.	      the trees, the running rivers, the rocks and sands.	      the trees, the running rivers, the rocks and sands.
			
  All hold spiritual joys and afterwards loosen them;	  All hold spiritual joys and afterwards loosen them;	  All hold spiritual joys and afterwards loosen them;	  All hold spiritual joys and afterwards loosen them;
  How can the real body ever die and be buried?	  How can the real body ever die and be buried?	  How can the real body ever die and be buried?	  How can the real body ever die and be buried?
			
  Of your real body and any man's or woman's real body,	  Of your real body and any man's or woman's real body,	  Of your real body and any man's or woman's real body,	  Of your real body and any man's or woman's real body,
  Item for item it will elude the hands of the corpse-cleaners and	  Item for item it will elude the hands of the corpse-cleaners and	  Item for item it will elude the hands of the corpse-cleaners and	  Item for item it will elude the hands of the corpse-cleaners and
      pass to fitting spheres,	      pass to fitting spheres,	      pass to fitting spheres,	      pass to fitting spheres,
  Carrying what has accrued to it from the moment of birth to the	  Carrying what has accrued to it from the moment of birth to the	  Carrying what has accrued to it from the moment of birth to the	  Carrying what has accrued to it from the moment of birth to the
      moment of death.	      moment of death.	      moment of death.	      moment of death.
			
  Not the types set up by the printer return their impression, the	  Not the types set up by the printer return their impression, the	  Not the types set up by the printer return their impression, the	  Not the types set up by the printer return their impression, the
      meaning, the main concern,	      meaning, the main concern,	      meaning, the main concern,	      meaning, the main concern,
  Any more than a man's substance and life or a woman's substance and	  Any more than a man's substance and life or a woman's substance and	  Any more than a man's substance and life or a woman's substance and	  Any more than a man's substance and life or a woman's substance and
      life return in the body and the soul,	      life return in the body and the soul,	      life return in the body and the soul,	      life return in the body and the soul,
  Indifferently before death and after death.	  Indifferently before death and after death.	  Indifferently before death and after death.	  Indifferently before death and after death.
			
  Behold, the body includes and is the meaning, the main concern and	  Behold, the body includes and is the meaning, the main concern and	  Behold, the body includes and is the meaning, the main concern and	  Behold, the body includes and is the meaning, the main concern and
      includes and is the soul;	      includes and is the soul;	      includes and is the soul;	      includes and is the soul;
  Whoever you are, how superb and how divine is your body, or any part	  Whoever you are, how superb and how divine is your body, or any part	  Whoever you are, how superb and how divine is your body, or any part	  Whoever you are, how superb and how divine is your body, or any part
      of it!	      of it!	      of it!	      of it!
			
       14	       14	       14	       14
  Whoever you are, to you endless announcements!	  Whoever you are, to you endless announcements!	  Whoever you are, to you endless announcements!	  Whoever you are, to you endless announcements!
			
  Daughter of the lands did you wait for your poet?	  Daughter of the lands did you wait for your poet?	  Daughter of the lands did you wait for your poet?	  Daughter of the lands did you wait for your poet?
  Did you wait for one with a flowing mouth and indicative hand?	  Did you wait for one with a flowing mouth and indicative hand?	  Did you wait for one with a flowing mouth and indicative hand?	  Did you wait for one with a flowing mouth and indicative hand?
  Toward the male of the States, and toward the female of the States,	  Toward the male of the States, and toward the female of the States,	  Toward the male of the States, and toward the female of the States,	  Toward the male of the States, and toward the female of the States,
  Exulting words, words to Democracy's lands.	  Exulting words, words to Democracy's lands.	  Exulting words, words to Democracy's lands.	  Exulting words, words to Democracy's lands.
			
  Interlink'd, food-yielding lands!	  Interlink'd, food-yielding lands!	  Interlink'd, food-yielding lands!	  Interlink'd, food-yielding lands!
  Land of coal and iron! land of gold! land of cotton, sugar, rice!	  Land of coal and iron! land of gold! land of cotton, sugar, rice!	  Land of coal and iron! land of gold! land of cotton, sugar, rice!	  Land of coal and iron! land of gold! land of cotton, sugar, rice!
  Land of wheat, beef, pork! land of wool and hemp! land of the apple	  Land of wheat, beef, pork! land of wool and hemp! land of the apple	  Land of wheat, beef, pork! land of wool and hemp! land of the apple	  Land of wheat, beef, pork! land of wool and hemp! land of the apple
      and the grape!	      and the grape!	      and the grape!	      and the grape!
  Land of the pastoral plains, the grass-fields of the world! land of	  Land of the pastoral plains, the grass-fields of the world! land of	  Land of the pastoral plains, the grass-fields of the world! land of	  Land of the pastoral plains, the grass-fields of the world! land of
      those sweet-air'd interminable plateaus!	      those sweet-air'd interminable plateaus!	      those sweet-air'd interminable plateaus!	      those sweet-air'd interminable plateaus!
  Land of the herd, the garden, the healthy house of adobie!	  Land of the herd, the garden, the healthy house of adobie!	  Land of the herd, the garden, the healthy house of adobie!	  Land of the herd, the garden, the healthy house of adobie!
  Lands where the north-west Columbia winds, and where the south-west	  Lands where the north-west Columbia winds, and where the south-west	  Lands where the north-west Columbia winds, and where the south-west	  Lands where the north-west Columbia winds, and where the south-west
      Colorado winds!	      Colorado winds!	      Colorado winds!	      Colorado winds!
  Land of the eastern Chesapeake! land of the Delaware!	  Land of the eastern Chesapeake! land of the Delaware!	  Land of the eastern Chesapeake! land of the Delaware!	  Land of the eastern Chesapeake! land of the Delaware!
  Land of Ontario, Erie, Huron, Michigan!	  Land of Ontario, Erie, Huron, Michigan!	  Land of Ontario, Erie, Huron, Michigan!	  Land of Ontario, Erie, Huron, Michigan!
  Land of the Old Thirteen! Massachusetts land! land of Vermont and	  Land of the Old Thirteen! Massachusetts land! land of Vermont and	  Land of the Old Thirteen! Massachusetts land! land of Vermont and	  Land of the Old Thirteen! Massachusetts land! land of Vermont and
      Connecticut!	      Connecticut!	      Connecticut!	      Connecticut!
  Land of the ocean shores! land of sierras and peaks!	  Land of the ocean shores! land of sierras and peaks!	  Land of the ocean shores! land of sierras and peaks!	  Land of the ocean shores! land of sierras and peaks!
  Land of boatmen and sailors! fishermen's land!	  Land of boatmen and sailors! fishermen's land!	  Land of boatmen and sailors! fishermen's land!	  Land of boatmen and sailors! fishermen's land!
  Inextricable lands! the clutch'd together! the passionate ones!	  Inextricable lands! the clutch'd together! the passionate ones!	  Inextricable lands! the clutch'd together! the passionate ones!	  Inextricable lands! the clutch'd together! the passionate ones!
  The side by side! the elder and younger brothers! the bony-limb'd!	  The side by side! the elder and younger brothers! the bony-limb'd!	  The side by side! the elder and younger brothers! the bony-limb'd!	  The side by side! the elder and younger brothers! the bony-limb'd!
  The great women's land! the feminine! the experienced sisters and	  The great women's land! the feminine! the experienced sisters and	  The great women's land! the feminine! the experienced sisters and	  The great women's land! the feminine! the experienced sisters and
      the inexperienced sisters!	      the inexperienced sisters!	      the inexperienced sisters!	      the inexperienced sisters!
  Far breath'd land! Arctic braced! Mexican breez'd! the diverse! the	  Far breath'd land! Arctic braced! Mexican breez'd! the diverse! the	  Far breath'd land! Arctic braced! Mexican breez'd! the diverse! the	  Far breath'd land! Arctic braced! Mexican breez'd! the diverse! the
      compact!	      compact!	      compact!	      compact!
  The Pennsylvanian! the Virginian! the double Carolinian!	  The Pennsylvanian! the Virginian! the double Carolinian!	  The Pennsylvanian! the Virginian! the double Carolinian!	  The Pennsylvanian! the Virginian! the double Carolinian!
  O all and each well-loved by me! my intrepid nations! O I at any	  O all and each well-loved by me! my intrepid nations! O I at any	  O all and each well-loved by me! my intrepid nations! O I at any	  O all and each well-loved by me! my intrepid nations! O I at any
      rate include you all with perfect love!	      rate include you all with perfect love!	      rate include you all with perfect love!	      rate include you all with perfect love!
  I cannot be discharged from you! not from one any sooner than another!	  I cannot be discharged from you! not from one any sooner than another!	  I cannot be discharged from you! not from one any sooner than another!	  I cannot be discharged from you! not from one any sooner than another!
  O death! O for all that, I am yet of you unseen this hour with	  O death! O for all that, I am yet of you unseen this hour with	  O death! O for all that, I am yet of you unseen this hour with	  O death! O for all that, I am yet of you unseen this hour with
      irrepressible love,	      irrepressible love,	      irrepressible love,	      irrepressible love,
  Walking New England, a friend, a traveler,	  Walking New England, a friend, a traveler,	  Walking New England, a friend, a traveler,	  Walking New England, a friend, a traveler,
  Splashing my bare feet in the edge of the summer ripples on	  Splashing my bare feet in the edge of the summer ripples on	  Splashing my bare feet in the edge of the summer ripples on	  Splashing my bare feet in the edge of the summer ripples on
      Paumanok's sands,	      Paumanok's sands,	      Paumanok's sands,	      Paumanok's sands,
  Crossing the prairies, dwelling again in Chicago, dwelling in every town,	  Crossing the prairies, dwelling again in Chicago, dwelling in every town,	  Crossing the prairies, dwelling again in Chicago, dwelling in every town,	  Crossing the prairies, dwelling again in Chicago, dwelling in every town,
  Observing shows, births, improvements, structures, arts,	  Observing shows, births, improvements, structures, arts,	  Observing shows, births, improvements, structures, arts,	  Observing shows, births, improvements, structures, arts,
  Listening to orators and oratresses in public halls,	  Listening to orators and oratresses in public halls,	  Listening to orators and oratresses in public halls,	  Listening to orators and oratresses in public halls,
  Of and through the States as during life, each man and woman my neighbor,	  Of and through the States as during life, each man and woman my neighbor,	  Of and through the States as during life, each man and woman my neighbor,	  Of and through the States as during life, each man and woman my neighbor,
  The Louisianian, the Georgian, as near to me, and I as near to him and her,	  The Louisianian, the Georgian, as near to me, and I as near to him and her,	  The Louisianian, the Georgian, as near to me, and I as near to him and her,	  The Louisianian, the Georgian, as near to me, and I as near to him and her,
  The Mississippian and Arkansian yet with me, and I yet with any of them,	  The Mississippian and Arkansian yet with me, and I yet with any of them,	  The Mississippian and Arkansian yet with me, and I yet with any of them,	  The Mississippian and Arkansian yet with me, and I yet with any of them,
  Yet upon the plains west of the spinal river, yet in my house of adobie,	  Yet upon the plains west of the spinal river, yet in my house of adobie,	  Yet upon the plains west of the spinal river, yet in my house of adobie,	  Yet upon the plains west of the spinal river, yet in my house of adobie,
  Yet returning eastward, yet in the Seaside State or in Maryland,	  Yet returning eastward, yet in the Seaside State or in Maryland,	  Yet returning eastward, yet in the Seaside State or in Maryland,	  Yet returning eastward, yet in the Seaside State or in Maryland,
  Yet Kanadian cheerily braving the winter, the snow and ice welcome to me,	  Yet Kanadian cheerily braving the winter, the snow and ice welcome to me,	  Yet Kanadian cheerily braving the winter, the snow and ice welcome to me,	  Yet Kanadian cheerily braving the winter, the snow and ice welcome to me,
  Yet a true son either of Maine or of the Granite State, or the	  Yet a true son either of Maine or of the Granite State, or the	  Yet a true son either of Maine or of the Granite State, or the	  Yet a true son either of Maine or of the Granite State, or the
      Narragansett Bay State, or the Empire State,	      Narragansett Bay State, or the Empire State,	      Narragansett Bay State, or the Empire State,	      Narragansett Bay State, or the Empire State,
  Yet sailing to other shores to annex the same, yet welcoming every	  Yet sailing to other shores to annex the same, yet welcoming every	  Yet sailing to other shores to annex the same, yet welcoming every	  Yet sailing to other shores to annex the same, yet welcoming every
      new brother,	      new brother,	      new brother,	      new brother,
  Hereby applying these leaves to the new ones from the hour they	  Hereby applying these leaves to the new ones from the hour they	  Hereby applying these leaves to the new ones from the hour they	  Hereby applying these leaves to the new ones from the hour they
      unite with the old ones,	      unite with the old ones,	      unite with the old ones,	      unite with the old ones,
  Coming among the new ones myself to be their companion and equal,	  Coming among the new ones myself to be their companion and equal,	  Coming among the new ones myself to be their companion and equal,	  Coming among the new ones myself to be their companion and equal,
      coming personally to you now,	      coming personally to you now,	      coming personally to you now,	      coming personally to you now,
  Enjoining you to acts, characters, spectacles, with me.	  Enjoining you to acts, characters, spectacles, with me.	  Enjoining you to acts, characters, spectacles, with me.	  Enjoining you to acts, characters, spectacles, with me.
			
       15	       15	       15	       15
  With me with firm holding, yet haste, haste on.	  With me with firm holding, yet haste, haste on.	  With me with firm holding, yet haste, haste on.	  With me with firm holding, yet haste, haste on.
  For your life adhere to me,	  For your life adhere to me,	  For your life adhere to me,	  For your life adhere to me,
  (I may have to be persuaded many times before I consent to give	  (I may have to be persuaded many times before I consent to give	  (I may have to be persuaded many times before I consent to give	  (I may have to be persuaded many times before I consent to give
      myself really to you, but what of that?	      myself really to you, but what of that?	      myself really to you, but what of that?	      myself really to you, but what of that?
  Must not Nature be persuaded many times?)	  Must not Nature be persuaded many times?)	  Must not Nature be persuaded many times?)	  Must not Nature be persuaded many times?)
			
  No dainty dolce affettuoso I,	  No dainty dolce affettuoso I,	  No dainty dolce affettuoso I,	  No dainty dolce affettuoso I,
  Bearded, sun-burnt, gray-neck'd, forbidding, I have arrived,	  Bearded, sun-burnt, gray-neck'd, forbidding, I have arrived,	  Bearded, sun-burnt, gray-neck'd, forbidding, I have arrived,	  Bearded, sun-burnt, gray-neck'd, forbidding, I have arrived,
  To be wrestled with as I pass for the solid prizes of the universe,	  To be wrestled with as I pass for the solid prizes of the universe,	  To be wrestled with as I pass for the solid prizes of the universe,	  To be wrestled with as I pass for the solid prizes of the universe,
  For such I afford whoever can persevere to win them.	  For such I afford whoever can persevere to win them.	  For such I afford whoever can persevere to win them.	  For such I afford whoever can persevere to win them.
			
       16	       16	       16	       16
  On my way a moment I pause,	  On my way a moment I pause,	  On my way a moment I pause,	  On my way a moment I pause,
  Here for you! and here for America!	  Here for you! and here for America!	  Here for you! and here for America!	  Here for you! and here for America!
  Still the present I raise aloft, still the future of the States I	  Still the present I raise aloft, still the future of the States I	  Still the present I raise aloft, still the future of the States I	  Still the present I raise aloft, still the future of the States I
      harbinge glad and sublime,	      harbinge glad and sublime,	      harbinge glad and sublime,	      harbinge glad and sublime,
  And for the past I pronounce what the air holds of the red aborigines.	  And for the past I pronounce what the air holds of the red aborigines.	  And for the past I pronounce what the air holds of the red aborigines.	  And for the past I pronounce what the air holds of the red aborigines.
			
  The red aborigines,	  The red aborigines,	  The red aborigines,	  The red aborigines,
  Leaving natural breaths, sounds of rain and winds, calls as of birds	  Leaving natural breaths, sounds of rain and winds, calls as of birds	  Leaving natural breaths, sounds of rain and winds, calls as of birds	  Leaving natural breaths, sounds of rain and winds, calls as of birds
      and animals in the woods, syllabled to us for names,	      and animals in the woods, syllabled to us for names,	      and animals in the woods, syllabled to us for names,	      and animals in the woods, syllabled to us for names,
  Okonee, Koosa, Ottawa, Monongahela, Sauk, Natchez, Chattahoochee,	  Okonee, Koosa, Ottawa, Monongahela, Sauk, Natchez, Chattahoochee,	  Okonee, Koosa, Ottawa, Monongahela, Sauk, Natchez, Chattahoochee,	  Okonee, Koosa, Ottawa, Monongahela, Sauk, Natchez, Chattahoochee,
      Kaqueta, Oronoco,	      Kaqueta, Oronoco,	      Kaqueta, Oronoco,	      Kaqueta, Oronoco,
  Wabash, Miami, Saginaw, Chippewa, Oshkosh, Walla-Walla,	  Wabash, Miami, Saginaw, Chippewa, Oshkosh, Walla-Walla,	  Wabash, Miami, Saginaw, Chippewa, Oshkosh, Walla-Walla,	  Wabash, Miami, Saginaw, Chippewa, Oshkosh, Walla-Walla,
  Leaving such to the States they melt, they depart, charging the	  Leaving such to the States they melt, they depart, charging the	  Leaving such to the States they melt, they depart, charging the	  Leaving such to the States they melt, they depart, charging the
      water and the land with names.	      water and the land with names.	      water and the land with names.	      water and the land with names.
			
       17	       17	       17	       17
  Expanding and swift, henceforth,	  Expanding and swift, henceforth,	  Expanding and swift, henceforth,	  Expanding and swift, henceforth,
  Elements, breeds, adjustments, turbulent, quick and audacious,	  Elements, breeds, adjustments, turbulent, quick and audacious,	  Elements, breeds, adjustments, turbulent, quick and audacious,	  Elements, breeds, adjustments, turbulent, quick and audacious,
  A world primal again, vistas of glory incessant and branching,	  A world primal again, vistas of glory incessant and branching,	  A world primal again, vistas of glory incessant and branching,	  A world primal again, vistas of glory incessant and branching,
  A new race dominating previous ones and grander far, with new contests,	  A new race dominating previous ones and grander far, with new contests,	  A new race dominating previous ones and grander far, with new contests,	  A new race dominating previous ones and grander far, with new contests,
  New politics, new literatures and religions, new inventions and arts.	  New politics, new literatures and religions, new inventions and arts.	  New politics, new literatures and religions, new inventions and arts.	  New politics, new literatures and religions, new inventions and arts.
			
  These, my voice announcing--I will sleep no more but arise,	  These, my voice announcing--I will sleep no more but arise,	  These, my voice announcing--I will sleep no more but arise,	  These, my voice announcing--I will sleep no more but arise,
  You oceans that have been calm within me! how I feel you,	  You oceans that have been calm within me! how I feel you,	  You oceans that have been calm within me! how I feel you,	  You oceans that have been calm within me! how I feel you,
      fathomless, stirring, preparing unprecedented waves and storms.	      fathomless, stirring, preparing unprecedented waves and storms.	      fathomless, stirring, preparing unprecedented waves and storms.	      fathomless, stirring, preparing unprecedented waves and storms.
			
       18	       18	       18	       18
  See, steamers steaming through my poems,	  See, steamers steaming through my poems,	  See, steamers steaming through my poems,	  See, steamers steaming through my poems,
  See, in my poems immigrants continually coming and landing,	  See, in my poems immigrants continually coming and landing,	  See, in my poems immigrants continually coming and landing,	  See, in my poems immigrants continually coming and landing,
  See, in arriere, the wigwam, the trail, the hunter's hut, the flat-boat,	  See, in arriere, the wigwam, the trail, the hunter's hut, the flat-boat,	  See, in arriere, the wigwam, the trail, the hunter's hut, the flat-boat,	  See, in arriere, the wigwam, the trail, the hunter's hut, the flat-boat,
      the maize-leaf, the claim, the rude fence, and the backwoods village,	      the maize-leaf, the claim, the rude fence, and the backwoods village,	      the maize-leaf, the claim, the rude fence, and the backwoods village,	      the maize-leaf, the claim, the rude fence, and the backwoods village,
  See, on the one side the Western Sea and on the other the Eastern Sea,	  See, on the one side the Western Sea and on the other the Eastern Sea,	  See, on the one side the Western Sea and on the other the Eastern Sea,	  See, on the one side the Western Sea and on the other the Eastern Sea,
      how they advance and retreat upon my poems as upon their own shores,	      how they advance and retreat upon my poems as upon their own shores,	      how they advance and retreat upon my poems as upon their own shores,	      how they advance and retreat upon my poems as upon their own shores,
  See, pastures and forests in my poems--see, animals wild and tame--see,	  See, pastures and forests in my poems--see, animals wild and tame--see,	  See, pastures and forests in my poems--see, animals wild and tame--see,	  See, pastures and forests in my poems--see, animals wild and tame--see,
      beyond the Kaw, countless herds of buffalo feeding on short curly grass,	      beyond the Kaw, countless herds of buffalo feeding on short curly grass,	      beyond the Kaw, countless herds of buffalo feeding on short curly grass,	      beyond the Kaw, countless herds of buffalo feeding on short curly grass,
  See, in my poems, cities, solid, vast, inland, with paved streets,	  See, in my poems, cities, solid, vast, inland, with paved streets,	  See, in my poems, cities, solid, vast, inland, with paved streets,	  See, in my poems, cities, solid, vast, inland, with paved streets,
      with iron and stone edifices, ceaseless vehicles, and commerce,	      with iron and stone edifices, ceaseless vehicles, and commerce,	      with iron and stone edifices, ceaseless vehicles, and commerce,	      with iron and stone edifices, ceaseless vehicles, and commerce,
  See, the many-cylinder'd steam printing-press--see, the electric	  See, the many-cylinder'd steam printing-press--see, the electric	  See, the many-cylinder'd steam printing-press--see, the electric	  See, the many-cylinder'd steam printing-press--see, the electric
      telegraph stretching across the continent,	      telegraph stretching across the continent,	      telegraph stretching across the continent,	      telegraph stretching across the continent,
  See, through Atlantica's depths pulses American Europe reaching,	  See, through Atlantica's depths pulses American Europe reaching,	  See, through Atlantica's depths pulses American Europe reaching,	  See, through Atlantica's depths pulses American Europe reaching,
      pulses of Europe duly return'd,	      pulses of Europe duly return'd,	      pulses of Europe duly return'd,	      pulses of Europe duly return'd,
  See, the strong and quick locomotive as it departs, panting, blowing	  See, the strong and quick locomotive as it departs, panting, blowing	  See, the strong and quick locomotive as it departs, panting, blowing	  See, the strong and quick locomotive as it departs, panting, blowing
      the steam-whistle,	      the steam-whistle,	      the steam-whistle,	      the steam-whistle,
  See, ploughmen ploughing farms--see, miners digging mines--see,	  See, ploughmen ploughing farms--see, miners digging mines--see,	  See, ploughmen ploughing farms--see, miners digging mines--see,	  See, ploughmen ploughing farms--see, miners digging mines--see,
      the numberless factories,	      the numberless factories,	      the numberless factories,	      the numberless factories,
  See, mechanics busy at their benches with tools--see from among them	  See, mechanics busy at their benches with tools--see from among them	  See, mechanics busy at their benches with tools--see from among them	  See, mechanics busy at their benches with tools--see from among them
      superior judges, philosophs, Presidents, emerge, drest in	      superior judges, philosophs, Presidents, emerge, drest in	      superior judges, philosophs, Presidents, emerge, drest in	      superior judges, philosophs, Presidents, emerge, drest in
      working dresses,	      working dresses,	      working dresses,	      working dresses,
  See, lounging through the shops and fields of the States, me	  See, lounging through the shops and fields of the States, me	  See, lounging through the shops and fields of the States, me	  See, lounging through the shops and fields of the States, me
      well-belov'd, close-held by day and night,	      well-belov'd, close-held by day and night,	      well-belov'd, close-held by day and night,	      well-belov'd, close-held by day and night,
  Hear the loud echoes of my songs there--read the hints come at last.	  Hear the loud echoes of my songs there--read the hints come at last.	  Hear the loud echoes of my songs there--read the hints come at last.	  Hear the loud echoes of my songs there--read the hints come at last.
			
       19	       19	       19	       19
  O camerado close! O you and me at last, and us two only.	  O camerado close! O you and me at last, and us two only.	  O camerado close! O you and me at last, and us two only.	  O camerado close! O you and me at last, and us two only.
  O a word to clear one's path ahead endlessly!	  O a word to clear one's path ahead endlessly!	  O a word to clear one's path ahead endlessly!	  O a word to clear one's path ahead endlessly!
  O something ecstatic and undemonstrable! O music wild!	  O something ecstatic and undemonstrable! O music wild!	  O something ecstatic and undemonstrable! O music wild!	  O something ecstatic and undemonstrable! O music wild!
  O now I triumph--and you shall also;	  O now I triumph--and you shall also;	  O now I triumph--and you shall also;	  O now I triumph--and you shall also;
  O hand in hand--O wholesome pleasure--O one more desirer and lover!	  O hand in hand--O wholesome pleasure--O one more desirer and lover!	  O hand in hand--O wholesome pleasure--O one more desirer and lover!	  O hand in hand--O wholesome pleasure--O one more desirer and lover!
  O to haste firm holding--to haste, haste on with me.	  O to haste firm holding--to haste, haste on with me.	  O to haste firm holding--to haste, haste on with me.	  O to haste firm holding--to haste, haste on with me.
			
			
			
			
BOOK III	BOOK III	BOOK III	BOOK III
			
			
Song of Myself	Song of Myself	Song of Myself	Song of Myself
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  I celebrate myself, and sing myself,	  I celebrate myself, and sing myself,	  I celebrate myself, and sing myself,	  I celebrate myself, and sing myself,
  And what I assume you shall assume,	  And what I assume you shall assume,	  And what I assume you shall assume,	  And what I assume you shall assume,
  For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.	  For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.	  For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.	  For every atom belonging to me as good belongs to you.
			
  I loafe and invite my soul,	  I loafe and invite my soul,	  I loafe and invite my soul,	  I loafe and invite my soul,
  I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass.	  I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass.	  I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass.	  I lean and loafe at my ease observing a spear of summer grass.
			
  My tongue, every atom of my blood, form'd from this soil, this air,	  My tongue, every atom of my blood, form'd from this soil, this air,	  My tongue, every atom of my blood, form'd from this soil, this air,	  My tongue, every atom of my blood, form'd from this soil, this air,
  Born here of parents born here from parents the same, and their	  Born here of parents born here from parents the same, and their	  Born here of parents born here from parents the same, and their	  Born here of parents born here from parents the same, and their
      parents the same,	      parents the same,	      parents the same,	      parents the same,
  I, now thirty-seven years old in perfect health begin,	  I, now thirty-seven years old in perfect health begin,	  I, now thirty-seven years old in perfect health begin,	  I, now thirty-seven years old in perfect health begin,
  Hoping to cease not till death.	  Hoping to cease not till death.	  Hoping to cease not till death.	  Hoping to cease not till death.
			
  Creeds and schools in abeyance,	  Creeds and schools in abeyance,	  Creeds and schools in abeyance,	  Creeds and schools in abeyance,
  Retiring back a while sufficed at what they are, but never forgotten,	  Retiring back a while sufficed at what they are, but never forgotten,	  Retiring back a while sufficed at what they are, but never forgotten,	  Retiring back a while sufficed at what they are, but never forgotten,
  I harbor for good or bad, I permit to speak at every hazard,	  I harbor for good or bad, I permit to speak at every hazard,	  I harbor for good or bad, I permit to speak at every hazard,	  I harbor for good or bad, I permit to speak at every hazard,
  Nature without check with original energy.	  Nature without check with original energy.	  Nature without check with original energy.	  Nature without check with original energy.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Houses and rooms are full of perfumes, the shelves are crowded with	  Houses and rooms are full of perfumes, the shelves are crowded with	  Houses and rooms are full of perfumes, the shelves are crowded with	  Houses and rooms are full of perfumes, the shelves are crowded with
      perfumes,	      perfumes,	      perfumes,	      perfumes,
  I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it,	  I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it,	  I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it,	  I breathe the fragrance myself and know it and like it,
  The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.	  The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.	  The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.	  The distillation would intoxicate me also, but I shall not let it.
			
  The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the	  The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the	  The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the	  The atmosphere is not a perfume, it has no taste of the
      distillation, it is odorless,	      distillation, it is odorless,	      distillation, it is odorless,	      distillation, it is odorless,
  It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it,	  It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it,	  It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it,	  It is for my mouth forever, I am in love with it,
  I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,	  I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,	  I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,	  I will go to the bank by the wood and become undisguised and naked,
  I am mad for it to be in contact with me.	  I am mad for it to be in contact with me.	  I am mad for it to be in contact with me.	  I am mad for it to be in contact with me.
			
  The smoke of my own breath,	  The smoke of my own breath,	  The smoke of my own breath,	  The smoke of my own breath,
  Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine,	  Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine,	  Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine,	  Echoes, ripples, buzz'd whispers, love-root, silk-thread, crotch and vine,
  My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing	  My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing	  My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing	  My respiration and inspiration, the beating of my heart, the passing
      of blood and air through my lungs,	      of blood and air through my lungs,	      of blood and air through my lungs,	      of blood and air through my lungs,
  The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and	  The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and	  The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and	  The sniff of green leaves and dry leaves, and of the shore and
      dark-color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn,	      dark-color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn,	      dark-color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn,	      dark-color'd sea-rocks, and of hay in the barn,
			
  The sound of the belch'd words of my voice loos'd to the eddies of	  The sound of the belch'd words of my voice loos'd to the eddies of	  The sound of the belch'd words of my voice loos'd to the eddies of	  The sound of the belch'd words of my voice loos'd to the eddies of
      the wind,	      the wind,	      the wind,	      the wind,
  A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms,	  A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms,	  A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms,	  A few light kisses, a few embraces, a reaching around of arms,
  The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag,	  The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag,	  The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag,	  The play of shine and shade on the trees as the supple boughs wag,
  The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields	  The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields	  The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields	  The delight alone or in the rush of the streets, or along the fields
      and hill-sides,	      and hill-sides,	      and hill-sides,	      and hill-sides,
  The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising	  The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising	  The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising	  The feeling of health, the full-noon trill, the song of me rising
      from bed and meeting the sun.	      from bed and meeting the sun.	      from bed and meeting the sun.	      from bed and meeting the sun.
			
  Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd the earth much?	  Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd the earth much?	  Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd the earth much?	  Have you reckon'd a thousand acres much? have you reckon'd the earth much?
  Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?	  Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?	  Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?	  Have you practis'd so long to learn to read?
  Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?	  Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?	  Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?	  Have you felt so proud to get at the meaning of poems?
			
  Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of	  Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of	  Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of	  Stop this day and night with me and you shall possess the origin of
      all poems,	      all poems,	      all poems,	      all poems,
  You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions	  You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions	  You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions	  You shall possess the good of the earth and sun, (there are millions
      of suns left,)	      of suns left,)	      of suns left,)	      of suns left,)
  You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through	  You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through	  You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through	  You shall no longer take things at second or third hand, nor look through
      the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books,	      the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books,	      the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books,	      the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres in books,
  You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me,	  You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me,	  You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me,	  You shall not look through my eyes either, nor take things from me,
  You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self.	  You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self.	  You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self.	  You shall listen to all sides and filter them from your self.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the	  I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the	  I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the	  I have heard what the talkers were talking, the talk of the
      beginning and the end,	      beginning and the end,	      beginning and the end,	      beginning and the end,
  But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.	  But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.	  But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.	  But I do not talk of the beginning or the end.
			
  There was never any more inception than there is now,	  There was never any more inception than there is now,	  There was never any more inception than there is now,	  There was never any more inception than there is now,
  Nor any more youth or age than there is now,	  Nor any more youth or age than there is now,	  Nor any more youth or age than there is now,	  Nor any more youth or age than there is now,
  And will never be any more perfection than there is now,	  And will never be any more perfection than there is now,	  And will never be any more perfection than there is now,	  And will never be any more perfection than there is now,
  Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.	  Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.	  Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.	  Nor any more heaven or hell than there is now.
			
  Urge and urge and urge,	  Urge and urge and urge,	  Urge and urge and urge,	  Urge and urge and urge,
  Always the procreant urge of the world.	  Always the procreant urge of the world.	  Always the procreant urge of the world.	  Always the procreant urge of the world.
			
  Out of the dimness opposite equals advance, always substance and	  Out of the dimness opposite equals advance, always substance and	  Out of the dimness opposite equals advance, always substance and	  Out of the dimness opposite equals advance, always substance and
      increase, always sex,	      increase, always sex,	      increase, always sex,	      increase, always sex,
  Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life.	  Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life.	  Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life.	  Always a knit of identity, always distinction, always a breed of life.
  To elaborate is no avail, learn'd and unlearn'd feel that it is so.	  To elaborate is no avail, learn'd and unlearn'd feel that it is so.	  To elaborate is no avail, learn'd and unlearn'd feel that it is so.	  To elaborate is no avail, learn'd and unlearn'd feel that it is so.
			
  Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well	  Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well	  Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well	  Sure as the most certain sure, plumb in the uprights, well
      entretied, braced in the beams,	      entretied, braced in the beams,	      entretied, braced in the beams,	      entretied, braced in the beams,
  Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical,	  Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical,	  Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical,	  Stout as a horse, affectionate, haughty, electrical,
  I and this mystery here we stand.	  I and this mystery here we stand.	  I and this mystery here we stand.	  I and this mystery here we stand.
			
  Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul.	  Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul.	  Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul.	  Clear and sweet is my soul, and clear and sweet is all that is not my soul.
			
  Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen,	  Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen,	  Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen,	  Lack one lacks both, and the unseen is proved by the seen,
  Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn.	  Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn.	  Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn.	  Till that becomes unseen and receives proof in its turn.
			
  Showing the best and dividing it from the worst age vexes age,	  Showing the best and dividing it from the worst age vexes age,	  Showing the best and dividing it from the worst age vexes age,	  Showing the best and dividing it from the worst age vexes age,
  Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they	  Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they	  Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they	  Knowing the perfect fitness and equanimity of things, while they
      discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself.	      discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself.	      discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself.	      discuss I am silent, and go bathe and admire myself.
			
  Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean,	  Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean,	  Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean,	  Welcome is every organ and attribute of me, and of any man hearty and clean,
  Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be	  Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be	  Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be	  Not an inch nor a particle of an inch is vile, and none shall be
      less familiar than the rest.	      less familiar than the rest.	      less familiar than the rest.	      less familiar than the rest.
			
  I am satisfied--I see, dance, laugh, sing;	  I am satisfied--I see, dance, laugh, sing;	  I am satisfied--I see, dance, laugh, sing;	  I am satisfied--I see, dance, laugh, sing;
  As the hugging and loving bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night,	  As the hugging and loving bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night,	  As the hugging and loving bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night,	  As the hugging and loving bed-fellow sleeps at my side through the night,
      and withdraws at the peep of the day with stealthy tread,	      and withdraws at the peep of the day with stealthy tread,	      and withdraws at the peep of the day with stealthy tread,	      and withdraws at the peep of the day with stealthy tread,
  Leaving me baskets cover'd with white towels swelling the house with	  Leaving me baskets cover'd with white towels swelling the house with	  Leaving me baskets cover'd with white towels swelling the house with	  Leaving me baskets cover'd with white towels swelling the house with
      their plenty,	      their plenty,	      their plenty,	      their plenty,
  Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes,	  Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes,	  Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes,	  Shall I postpone my acceptation and realization and scream at my eyes,
  That they turn from gazing after and down the road,	  That they turn from gazing after and down the road,	  That they turn from gazing after and down the road,	  That they turn from gazing after and down the road,
  And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent,	  And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent,	  And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent,	  And forthwith cipher and show me to a cent,
  Exactly the value of one and exactly the value of two, and which is ahead?	  Exactly the value of one and exactly the value of two, and which is ahead?	  Exactly the value of one and exactly the value of two, and which is ahead?	  Exactly the value of one and exactly the value of two, and which is ahead?
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Trippers and askers surround me,	  Trippers and askers surround me,	  Trippers and askers surround me,	  Trippers and askers surround me,
  People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and	  People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and	  People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and	  People I meet, the effect upon me of my early life or the ward and
      city I live in, or the nation,	      city I live in, or the nation,	      city I live in, or the nation,	      city I live in, or the nation,
  The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new,	  The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new,	  The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new,	  The latest dates, discoveries, inventions, societies, authors old and new,
  My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues,	  My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues,	  My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues,	  My dinner, dress, associates, looks, compliments, dues,
  The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love,	  The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love,	  The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love,	  The real or fancied indifference of some man or woman I love,
  The sickness of one of my folks or of myself, or ill-doing or loss	  The sickness of one of my folks or of myself, or ill-doing or loss	  The sickness of one of my folks or of myself, or ill-doing or loss	  The sickness of one of my folks or of myself, or ill-doing or loss
      or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations,	      or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations,	      or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations,	      or lack of money, or depressions or exaltations,
  Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news,	  Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news,	  Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news,	  Battles, the horrors of fratricidal war, the fever of doubtful news,
      the fitful events;	      the fitful events;	      the fitful events;	      the fitful events;
  These come to me days and nights and go from me again,	  These come to me days and nights and go from me again,	  These come to me days and nights and go from me again,	  These come to me days and nights and go from me again,
  But they are not the Me myself.	  But they are not the Me myself.	  But they are not the Me myself.	  But they are not the Me myself.
			
  Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am,	  Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am,	  Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am,	  Apart from the pulling and hauling stands what I am,
  Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary,	  Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary,	  Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary,	  Stands amused, complacent, compassionating, idle, unitary,
  Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest,	  Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest,	  Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest,	  Looks down, is erect, or bends an arm on an impalpable certain rest,
  Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next,	  Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next,	  Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next,	  Looking with side-curved head curious what will come next,
  Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it.	  Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it.	  Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it.	  Both in and out of the game and watching and wondering at it.
			
  Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with	  Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with	  Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with	  Backward I see in my own days where I sweated through fog with
      linguists and contenders,	      linguists and contenders,	      linguists and contenders,	      linguists and contenders,
  I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait.	  I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait.	  I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait.	  I have no mockings or arguments, I witness and wait.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  I believe in you my soul, the other I am must not abase itself to you,	  I believe in you my soul, the other I am must not abase itself to you,	  I believe in you my soul, the other I am must not abase itself to you,	  I believe in you my soul, the other I am must not abase itself to you,
  And you must not be abased to the other.	  And you must not be abased to the other.	  And you must not be abased to the other.	  And you must not be abased to the other.
			
  Loafe with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat,	  Loafe with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat,	  Loafe with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat,	  Loafe with me on the grass, loose the stop from your throat,
  Not words, not music or rhyme I want, not custom or lecture, not	  Not words, not music or rhyme I want, not custom or lecture, not	  Not words, not music or rhyme I want, not custom or lecture, not	  Not words, not music or rhyme I want, not custom or lecture, not
      even the best,	      even the best,	      even the best,	      even the best,
  Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.	  Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.	  Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.	  Only the lull I like, the hum of your valved voice.
			
  I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning,	  I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning,	  I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning,	  I mind how once we lay such a transparent summer morning,
  How you settled your head athwart my hips and gently turn'd over upon me,	  How you settled your head athwart my hips and gently turn'd over upon me,	  How you settled your head athwart my hips and gently turn'd over upon me,	  How you settled your head athwart my hips and gently turn'd over upon me,
  And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue	  And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue	  And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue	  And parted the shirt from my bosom-bone, and plunged your tongue
      to my bare-stript heart,	      to my bare-stript heart,	      to my bare-stript heart,	      to my bare-stript heart,
  And reach'd till you felt my beard, and reach'd till you held my feet.	  And reach'd till you felt my beard, and reach'd till you held my feet.	  And reach'd till you felt my beard, and reach'd till you held my feet.	  And reach'd till you felt my beard, and reach'd till you held my feet.
			
  Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass	  Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass	  Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass	  Swiftly arose and spread around me the peace and knowledge that pass
      all the argument of the earth,	      all the argument of the earth,	      all the argument of the earth,	      all the argument of the earth,
  And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,	  And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,	  And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,	  And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own,
  And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,	  And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,	  And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,	  And I know that the spirit of God is the brother of my own,
  And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the women	  And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the women	  And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the women	  And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the women
      my sisters and lovers,	      my sisters and lovers,	      my sisters and lovers,	      my sisters and lovers,
  And that a kelson of the creation is love,	  And that a kelson of the creation is love,	  And that a kelson of the creation is love,	  And that a kelson of the creation is love,
  And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields,	  And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields,	  And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields,	  And limitless are leaves stiff or drooping in the fields,
  And brown ants in the little wells beneath them,	  And brown ants in the little wells beneath them,	  And brown ants in the little wells beneath them,	  And brown ants in the little wells beneath them,
  And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heap'd stones, elder, mullein and	  And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heap'd stones, elder, mullein and	  And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heap'd stones, elder, mullein and	  And mossy scabs of the worm fence, heap'd stones, elder, mullein and
      poke-weed.	      poke-weed.	      poke-weed.	      poke-weed.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;	  A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;	  A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;	  A child said What is the grass? fetching it to me with full hands;
  How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he.	  How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he.	  How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he.	  How could I answer the child? I do not know what it is any more than he.
			
  I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green	  I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green	  I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green	  I guess it must be the flag of my disposition, out of hopeful green
      stuff woven.	      stuff woven.	      stuff woven.	      stuff woven.
			
  Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,	  Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,	  Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,	  Or I guess it is the handkerchief of the Lord,
  A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt,	  A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt,	  A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt,	  A scented gift and remembrancer designedly dropt,
  Bearing the owner's name someway in the corners, that we may see	  Bearing the owner's name someway in the corners, that we may see	  Bearing the owner's name someway in the corners, that we may see	  Bearing the owner's name someway in the corners, that we may see
      and remark, and say Whose?	      and remark, and say Whose?	      and remark, and say Whose?	      and remark, and say Whose?
			
  Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation.	  Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation.	  Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation.	  Or I guess the grass is itself a child, the produced babe of the vegetation.
			
  Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,	  Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,	  Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,	  Or I guess it is a uniform hieroglyphic,
  And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,	  And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,	  And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,	  And it means, Sprouting alike in broad zones and narrow zones,
  Growing among black folks as among white,	  Growing among black folks as among white,	  Growing among black folks as among white,	  Growing among black folks as among white,
  Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I	  Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I	  Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I	  Kanuck, Tuckahoe, Congressman, Cuff, I give them the same, I
      receive them the same.	      receive them the same.	      receive them the same.	      receive them the same.
			
  And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.	  And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.	  And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.	  And now it seems to me the beautiful uncut hair of graves.
			
  Tenderly will I use you curling grass,	  Tenderly will I use you curling grass,	  Tenderly will I use you curling grass,	  Tenderly will I use you curling grass,
  It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,	  It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,	  It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,	  It may be you transpire from the breasts of young men,
  It may be if I had known them I would have loved them,	  It may be if I had known them I would have loved them,	  It may be if I had known them I would have loved them,	  It may be if I had known them I would have loved them,
  It may be you are from old people, or from offspring taken soon out	  It may be you are from old people, or from offspring taken soon out	  It may be you are from old people, or from offspring taken soon out	  It may be you are from old people, or from offspring taken soon out
      of their mothers' laps,	      of their mothers' laps,	      of their mothers' laps,	      of their mothers' laps,
  And here you are the mothers' laps.	  And here you are the mothers' laps.	  And here you are the mothers' laps.	  And here you are the mothers' laps.
			
  This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers,	  This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers,	  This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers,	  This grass is very dark to be from the white heads of old mothers,
  Darker than the colorless beards of old men,	  Darker than the colorless beards of old men,	  Darker than the colorless beards of old men,	  Darker than the colorless beards of old men,
  Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.	  Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.	  Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.	  Dark to come from under the faint red roofs of mouths.
			
  O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues,	  O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues,	  O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues,	  O I perceive after all so many uttering tongues,
  And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing.	  And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing.	  And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing.	  And I perceive they do not come from the roofs of mouths for nothing.
			
  I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,	  I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,	  I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,	  I wish I could translate the hints about the dead young men and women,
  And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken	  And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken	  And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken	  And the hints about old men and mothers, and the offspring taken
      soon out of their laps.	      soon out of their laps.	      soon out of their laps.	      soon out of their laps.
			
  What do you think has become of the young and old men?	  What do you think has become of the young and old men?	  What do you think has become of the young and old men?	  What do you think has become of the young and old men?
  And what do you think has become of the women and children?	  And what do you think has become of the women and children?	  And what do you think has become of the women and children?	  And what do you think has become of the women and children?
			
  They are alive and well somewhere,	  They are alive and well somewhere,	  They are alive and well somewhere,	  They are alive and well somewhere,
  The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,	  The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,	  The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,	  The smallest sprout shows there is really no death,
  And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the	  And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the	  And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the	  And if ever there was it led forward life, and does not wait at the
      end to arrest it,	      end to arrest it,	      end to arrest it,	      end to arrest it,
  And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.	  And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.	  And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.	  And ceas'd the moment life appear'd.
			
  All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses,	  All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses,	  All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses,	  All goes onward and outward, nothing collapses,
  And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.	  And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.	  And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.	  And to die is different from what any one supposed, and luckier.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?	  Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?	  Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?	  Has any one supposed it lucky to be born?
  I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it.	  I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it.	  I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it.	  I hasten to inform him or her it is just as lucky to die, and I know it.
			
  I pass death with the dying and birth with the new-wash'd babe, and	  I pass death with the dying and birth with the new-wash'd babe, and	  I pass death with the dying and birth with the new-wash'd babe, and	  I pass death with the dying and birth with the new-wash'd babe, and
      am not contain'd between my hat and boots,	      am not contain'd between my hat and boots,	      am not contain'd between my hat and boots,	      am not contain'd between my hat and boots,
  And peruse manifold objects, no two alike and every one good,	  And peruse manifold objects, no two alike and every one good,	  And peruse manifold objects, no two alike and every one good,	  And peruse manifold objects, no two alike and every one good,
  The earth good and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good.	  The earth good and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good.	  The earth good and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good.	  The earth good and the stars good, and their adjuncts all good.
			
  I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth,	  I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth,	  I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth,	  I am not an earth nor an adjunct of an earth,
  I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and	  I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and	  I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and	  I am the mate and companion of people, all just as immortal and
      fathomless as myself,	      fathomless as myself,	      fathomless as myself,	      fathomless as myself,
  (They do not know how immortal, but I know.)	  (They do not know how immortal, but I know.)	  (They do not know how immortal, but I know.)	  (They do not know how immortal, but I know.)
			
  Every kind for itself and its own, for me mine male and female,	  Every kind for itself and its own, for me mine male and female,	  Every kind for itself and its own, for me mine male and female,	  Every kind for itself and its own, for me mine male and female,
  For me those that have been boys and that love women,	  For me those that have been boys and that love women,	  For me those that have been boys and that love women,	  For me those that have been boys and that love women,
  For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted,	  For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted,	  For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted,	  For me the man that is proud and feels how it stings to be slighted,
  For me the sweet-heart and the old maid, for me mothers and the	  For me the sweet-heart and the old maid, for me mothers and the	  For me the sweet-heart and the old maid, for me mothers and the	  For me the sweet-heart and the old maid, for me mothers and the
      mothers of mothers,	      mothers of mothers,	      mothers of mothers,	      mothers of mothers,
  For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears,	  For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears,	  For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears,	  For me lips that have smiled, eyes that have shed tears,
  For me children and the begetters of children.	  For me children and the begetters of children.	  For me children and the begetters of children.	  For me children and the begetters of children.
			
  Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded,	  Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded,	  Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded,	  Undrape! you are not guilty to me, nor stale nor discarded,
  I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no,	  I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no,	  I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no,	  I see through the broadcloth and gingham whether or no,
  And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away.	  And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away.	  And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away.	  And am around, tenacious, acquisitive, tireless, and cannot be shaken away.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  The little one sleeps in its cradle,	  The little one sleeps in its cradle,	  The little one sleeps in its cradle,	  The little one sleeps in its cradle,
  I lift the gauze and look a long time, and silently brush away flies	  I lift the gauze and look a long time, and silently brush away flies	  I lift the gauze and look a long time, and silently brush away flies	  I lift the gauze and look a long time, and silently brush away flies
      with my hand.	      with my hand.	      with my hand.	      with my hand.
			
  The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up the bushy hill,	  The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up the bushy hill,	  The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up the bushy hill,	  The youngster and the red-faced girl turn aside up the bushy hill,
  I peeringly view them from the top.	  I peeringly view them from the top.	  I peeringly view them from the top.	  I peeringly view them from the top.
			
  The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bedroom,	  The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bedroom,	  The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bedroom,	  The suicide sprawls on the bloody floor of the bedroom,
  I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair, I note where the pistol	  I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair, I note where the pistol	  I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair, I note where the pistol	  I witness the corpse with its dabbled hair, I note where the pistol
      has fallen.	      has fallen.	      has fallen.	      has fallen.
			
  The blab of the pave, tires of carts, sluff of boot-soles, talk of	  The blab of the pave, tires of carts, sluff of boot-soles, talk of	  The blab of the pave, tires of carts, sluff of boot-soles, talk of	  The blab of the pave, tires of carts, sluff of boot-soles, talk of
      the promenaders,	      the promenaders,	      the promenaders,	      the promenaders,
  The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the	  The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the	  The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the	  The heavy omnibus, the driver with his interrogating thumb, the
      clank of the shod horses on the granite floor,	      clank of the shod horses on the granite floor,	      clank of the shod horses on the granite floor,	      clank of the shod horses on the granite floor,
  The snow-sleighs, clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of snow-balls,	  The snow-sleighs, clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of snow-balls,	  The snow-sleighs, clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of snow-balls,	  The snow-sleighs, clinking, shouted jokes, pelts of snow-balls,
  The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous'd mobs,	  The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous'd mobs,	  The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous'd mobs,	  The hurrahs for popular favorites, the fury of rous'd mobs,
  The flap of the curtain'd litter, a sick man inside borne to the hospital,	  The flap of the curtain'd litter, a sick man inside borne to the hospital,	  The flap of the curtain'd litter, a sick man inside borne to the hospital,	  The flap of the curtain'd litter, a sick man inside borne to the hospital,
  The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall,	  The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall,	  The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall,	  The meeting of enemies, the sudden oath, the blows and fall,
  The excited crowd, the policeman with his star quickly working his	  The excited crowd, the policeman with his star quickly working his	  The excited crowd, the policeman with his star quickly working his	  The excited crowd, the policeman with his star quickly working his
      passage to the centre of the crowd,	      passage to the centre of the crowd,	      passage to the centre of the crowd,	      passage to the centre of the crowd,
  The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes,	  The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes,	  The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes,	  The impassive stones that receive and return so many echoes,
  What groans of over-fed or half-starv'd who fall sunstruck or in fits,	  What groans of over-fed or half-starv'd who fall sunstruck or in fits,	  What groans of over-fed or half-starv'd who fall sunstruck or in fits,	  What groans of over-fed or half-starv'd who fall sunstruck or in fits,
  What exclamations of women taken suddenly who hurry home and	  What exclamations of women taken suddenly who hurry home and	  What exclamations of women taken suddenly who hurry home and	  What exclamations of women taken suddenly who hurry home and
      give birth to babes,	      give birth to babes,	      give birth to babes,	      give birth to babes,
  What living and buried speech is always vibrating here, what howls	  What living and buried speech is always vibrating here, what howls	  What living and buried speech is always vibrating here, what howls	  What living and buried speech is always vibrating here, what howls
      restrain'd by decorum,	      restrain'd by decorum,	      restrain'd by decorum,	      restrain'd by decorum,
  Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances,	  Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances,	  Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances,	  Arrests of criminals, slights, adulterous offers made, acceptances,
      rejections with convex lips,	      rejections with convex lips,	      rejections with convex lips,	      rejections with convex lips,
  I mind them or the show or resonance of them--I come and I depart.	  I mind them or the show or resonance of them--I come and I depart.	  I mind them or the show or resonance of them--I come and I depart.	  I mind them or the show or resonance of them--I come and I depart.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  The big doors of the country barn stand open and ready,	  The big doors of the country barn stand open and ready,	  The big doors of the country barn stand open and ready,	  The big doors of the country barn stand open and ready,
  The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon,	  The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon,	  The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon,	  The dried grass of the harvest-time loads the slow-drawn wagon,
  The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged,	  The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged,	  The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged,	  The clear light plays on the brown gray and green intertinged,
  The armfuls are pack'd to the sagging mow.	  The armfuls are pack'd to the sagging mow.	  The armfuls are pack'd to the sagging mow.	  The armfuls are pack'd to the sagging mow.
			
  I am there, I help, I came stretch'd atop of the load,	  I am there, I help, I came stretch'd atop of the load,	  I am there, I help, I came stretch'd atop of the load,	  I am there, I help, I came stretch'd atop of the load,
  I felt its soft jolts, one leg reclined on the other,	  I felt its soft jolts, one leg reclined on the other,	  I felt its soft jolts, one leg reclined on the other,	  I felt its soft jolts, one leg reclined on the other,
  I jump from the cross-beams and seize the clover and timothy,	  I jump from the cross-beams and seize the clover and timothy,	  I jump from the cross-beams and seize the clover and timothy,	  I jump from the cross-beams and seize the clover and timothy,
  And roll head over heels and tangle my hair full of wisps.	  And roll head over heels and tangle my hair full of wisps.	  And roll head over heels and tangle my hair full of wisps.	  And roll head over heels and tangle my hair full of wisps.
			
       10	       10	       10	       10
  Alone far in the wilds and mountains I hunt,	  Alone far in the wilds and mountains I hunt,	  Alone far in the wilds and mountains I hunt,	  Alone far in the wilds and mountains I hunt,
  Wandering amazed at my own lightness and glee,	  Wandering amazed at my own lightness and glee,	  Wandering amazed at my own lightness and glee,	  Wandering amazed at my own lightness and glee,
  In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night,	  In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night,	  In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night,	  In the late afternoon choosing a safe spot to pass the night,
  Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh-kill'd game,	  Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh-kill'd game,	  Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh-kill'd game,	  Kindling a fire and broiling the fresh-kill'd game,
  Falling asleep on the gather'd leaves with my dog and gun by my side.	  Falling asleep on the gather'd leaves with my dog and gun by my side.	  Falling asleep on the gather'd leaves with my dog and gun by my side.	  Falling asleep on the gather'd leaves with my dog and gun by my side.
			
  The Yankee clipper is under her sky-sails, she cuts the sparkle and scud,	  The Yankee clipper is under her sky-sails, she cuts the sparkle and scud,	  The Yankee clipper is under her sky-sails, she cuts the sparkle and scud,	  The Yankee clipper is under her sky-sails, she cuts the sparkle and scud,
  My eyes settle the land, I bend at her prow or shout joyously from the deck.	  My eyes settle the land, I bend at her prow or shout joyously from the deck.	  My eyes settle the land, I bend at her prow or shout joyously from the deck.	  My eyes settle the land, I bend at her prow or shout joyously from the deck.
			
  The boatmen and clam-diggers arose early and stopt for me,	  The boatmen and clam-diggers arose early and stopt for me,	  The boatmen and clam-diggers arose early and stopt for me,	  The boatmen and clam-diggers arose early and stopt for me,
  I tuck'd my trowser-ends in my boots and went and had a good time;	  I tuck'd my trowser-ends in my boots and went and had a good time;	  I tuck'd my trowser-ends in my boots and went and had a good time;	  I tuck'd my trowser-ends in my boots and went and had a good time;
  You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.	  You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.	  You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.	  You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle.
			
  I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far west,	  I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far west,	  I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far west,	  I saw the marriage of the trapper in the open air in the far west,
      the bride was a red girl,	      the bride was a red girl,	      the bride was a red girl,	      the bride was a red girl,
  Her father and his friends sat near cross-legged and dumbly smoking,	  Her father and his friends sat near cross-legged and dumbly smoking,	  Her father and his friends sat near cross-legged and dumbly smoking,	  Her father and his friends sat near cross-legged and dumbly smoking,
      they had moccasins to their feet and large thick blankets	      they had moccasins to their feet and large thick blankets	      they had moccasins to their feet and large thick blankets	      they had moccasins to their feet and large thick blankets
      hanging from their shoulders,	      hanging from their shoulders,	      hanging from their shoulders,	      hanging from their shoulders,
  On a bank lounged the trapper, he was drest mostly in skins, his luxuriant	  On a bank lounged the trapper, he was drest mostly in skins, his luxuriant	  On a bank lounged the trapper, he was drest mostly in skins, his luxuriant	  On a bank lounged the trapper, he was drest mostly in skins, his luxuriant
      beard and curls protected his neck, he held his bride by the hand,	      beard and curls protected his neck, he held his bride by the hand,	      beard and curls protected his neck, he held his bride by the hand,	      beard and curls protected his neck, he held his bride by the hand,
  She had long eyelashes, her head was bare, her coarse straight locks	  She had long eyelashes, her head was bare, her coarse straight locks	  She had long eyelashes, her head was bare, her coarse straight locks	  She had long eyelashes, her head was bare, her coarse straight locks
      descended upon her voluptuous limbs and reach'd to her feet.	      descended upon her voluptuous limbs and reach'd to her feet.	      descended upon her voluptuous limbs and reach'd to her feet.	      descended upon her voluptuous limbs and reach'd to her feet.
			
  The runaway slave came to my house and stopt outside,	  The runaway slave came to my house and stopt outside,	  The runaway slave came to my house and stopt outside,	  The runaway slave came to my house and stopt outside,
  I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile,	  I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile,	  I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile,	  I heard his motions crackling the twigs of the woodpile,
  Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsy and weak,	  Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsy and weak,	  Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsy and weak,	  Through the swung half-door of the kitchen I saw him limpsy and weak,
  And went where he sat on a log and led him in and assured him,	  And went where he sat on a log and led him in and assured him,	  And went where he sat on a log and led him in and assured him,	  And went where he sat on a log and led him in and assured him,
  And brought water and fill'd a tub for his sweated body and bruis'd feet,	  And brought water and fill'd a tub for his sweated body and bruis'd feet,	  And brought water and fill'd a tub for his sweated body and bruis'd feet,	  And brought water and fill'd a tub for his sweated body and bruis'd feet,
  And gave him a room that enter'd from my own, and gave him some	  And gave him a room that enter'd from my own, and gave him some	  And gave him a room that enter'd from my own, and gave him some	  And gave him a room that enter'd from my own, and gave him some
      coarse clean clothes,	      coarse clean clothes,	      coarse clean clothes,	      coarse clean clothes,
  And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness,	  And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness,	  And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness,	  And remember perfectly well his revolving eyes and his awkwardness,
  And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;	  And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;	  And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;	  And remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;
  He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and pass'd north,	  He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and pass'd north,	  He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and pass'd north,	  He staid with me a week before he was recuperated and pass'd north,
  I had him sit next me at table, my fire-lock lean'd in the corner.	  I had him sit next me at table, my fire-lock lean'd in the corner.	  I had him sit next me at table, my fire-lock lean'd in the corner.	  I had him sit next me at table, my fire-lock lean'd in the corner.
			
       11	       11	       11	       11
  Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore,	  Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore,	  Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore,	  Twenty-eight young men bathe by the shore,
  Twenty-eight young men and all so friendly;	  Twenty-eight young men and all so friendly;	  Twenty-eight young men and all so friendly;	  Twenty-eight young men and all so friendly;
  Twenty-eight years of womanly life and all so lonesome.	  Twenty-eight years of womanly life and all so lonesome.	  Twenty-eight years of womanly life and all so lonesome.	  Twenty-eight years of womanly life and all so lonesome.
			
  She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank,	  She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank,	  She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank,	  She owns the fine house by the rise of the bank,
  She hides handsome and richly drest aft the blinds of the window.	  She hides handsome and richly drest aft the blinds of the window.	  She hides handsome and richly drest aft the blinds of the window.	  She hides handsome and richly drest aft the blinds of the window.
			
  Which of the young men does she like the best?	  Which of the young men does she like the best?	  Which of the young men does she like the best?	  Which of the young men does she like the best?
  Ah the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.	  Ah the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.	  Ah the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.	  Ah the homeliest of them is beautiful to her.
			
  Where are you off to, lady? for I see you,	  Where are you off to, lady? for I see you,	  Where are you off to, lady? for I see you,	  Where are you off to, lady? for I see you,
  You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room.	  You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room.	  You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room.	  You splash in the water there, yet stay stock still in your room.
			
  Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather,	  Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather,	  Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather,	  Dancing and laughing along the beach came the twenty-ninth bather,
  The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them.	  The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them.	  The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them.	  The rest did not see her, but she saw them and loved them.
			
  The beards of the young men glisten'd with wet, it ran from their long hair,	  The beards of the young men glisten'd with wet, it ran from their long hair,	  The beards of the young men glisten'd with wet, it ran from their long hair,	  The beards of the young men glisten'd with wet, it ran from their long hair,
  Little streams pass'd all over their bodies.	  Little streams pass'd all over their bodies.	  Little streams pass'd all over their bodies.	  Little streams pass'd all over their bodies.
			
  An unseen hand also pass'd over their bodies,	  An unseen hand also pass'd over their bodies,	  An unseen hand also pass'd over their bodies,	  An unseen hand also pass'd over their bodies,
  It descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs.	  It descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs.	  It descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs.	  It descended tremblingly from their temples and ribs.
			
  The young men float on their backs, their white bellies bulge to the	  The young men float on their backs, their white bellies bulge to the	  The young men float on their backs, their white bellies bulge to the	  The young men float on their backs, their white bellies bulge to the
      sun, they do not ask who seizes fast to them,	      sun, they do not ask who seizes fast to them,	      sun, they do not ask who seizes fast to them,	      sun, they do not ask who seizes fast to them,
  They do not know who puffs and declines with pendant and bending arch,	  They do not know who puffs and declines with pendant and bending arch,	  They do not know who puffs and declines with pendant and bending arch,	  They do not know who puffs and declines with pendant and bending arch,
  They do not think whom they souse with spray.	  They do not think whom they souse with spray.	  They do not think whom they souse with spray.	  They do not think whom they souse with spray.
			
       12	       12	       12	       12
  The butcher-boy puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife	  The butcher-boy puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife	  The butcher-boy puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife	  The butcher-boy puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife
      at the stall in the market,	      at the stall in the market,	      at the stall in the market,	      at the stall in the market,
  I loiter enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and break-down.	  I loiter enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and break-down.	  I loiter enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and break-down.	  I loiter enjoying his repartee and his shuffle and break-down.
			
  Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil,	  Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil,	  Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil,	  Blacksmiths with grimed and hairy chests environ the anvil,
  Each has his main-sledge, they are all out, there is a great heat in	  Each has his main-sledge, they are all out, there is a great heat in	  Each has his main-sledge, they are all out, there is a great heat in	  Each has his main-sledge, they are all out, there is a great heat in
      the fire.	      the fire.	      the fire.	      the fire.
			
  From the cinder-strew'd threshold I follow their movements,	  From the cinder-strew'd threshold I follow their movements,	  From the cinder-strew'd threshold I follow their movements,	  From the cinder-strew'd threshold I follow their movements,
  The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms,	  The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms,	  The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms,	  The lithe sheer of their waists plays even with their massive arms,
  Overhand the hammers swing, overhand so slow, overhand so sure,	  Overhand the hammers swing, overhand so slow, overhand so sure,	  Overhand the hammers swing, overhand so slow, overhand so sure,	  Overhand the hammers swing, overhand so slow, overhand so sure,
  They do not hasten, each man hits in his place.	  They do not hasten, each man hits in his place.	  They do not hasten, each man hits in his place.	  They do not hasten, each man hits in his place.
			
       13	       13	       13	       13
  The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses, the block swags	  The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses, the block swags	  The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses, the block swags	  The negro holds firmly the reins of his four horses, the block swags
      underneath on its tied-over chain,	      underneath on its tied-over chain,	      underneath on its tied-over chain,	      underneath on its tied-over chain,
  The negro that drives the long dray of the stone-yard, steady and	  The negro that drives the long dray of the stone-yard, steady and	  The negro that drives the long dray of the stone-yard, steady and	  The negro that drives the long dray of the stone-yard, steady and
      tall he stands pois'd on one leg on the string-piece,	      tall he stands pois'd on one leg on the string-piece,	      tall he stands pois'd on one leg on the string-piece,	      tall he stands pois'd on one leg on the string-piece,
  His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast and loosens over	  His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast and loosens over	  His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast and loosens over	  His blue shirt exposes his ample neck and breast and loosens over
      his hip-band,	      his hip-band,	      his hip-band,	      his hip-band,
  His glance is calm and commanding, he tosses the slouch of his hat	  His glance is calm and commanding, he tosses the slouch of his hat	  His glance is calm and commanding, he tosses the slouch of his hat	  His glance is calm and commanding, he tosses the slouch of his hat
      away from his forehead,	      away from his forehead,	      away from his forehead,	      away from his forehead,
  The sun falls on his crispy hair and mustache, falls on the black of	  The sun falls on his crispy hair and mustache, falls on the black of	  The sun falls on his crispy hair and mustache, falls on the black of	  The sun falls on his crispy hair and mustache, falls on the black of
      his polish'd and perfect limbs.	      his polish'd and perfect limbs.	      his polish'd and perfect limbs.	      his polish'd and perfect limbs.
			
  I behold the picturesque giant and love him, and I do not stop there,	  I behold the picturesque giant and love him, and I do not stop there,	  I behold the picturesque giant and love him, and I do not stop there,	  I behold the picturesque giant and love him, and I do not stop there,
  I go with the team also.	  I go with the team also.	  I go with the team also.	  I go with the team also.
			
  In me the caresser of life wherever moving, backward as well as	  In me the caresser of life wherever moving, backward as well as	  In me the caresser of life wherever moving, backward as well as	  In me the caresser of life wherever moving, backward as well as
      forward sluing,	      forward sluing,	      forward sluing,	      forward sluing,
  To niches aside and junior bending, not a person or object missing,	  To niches aside and junior bending, not a person or object missing,	  To niches aside and junior bending, not a person or object missing,	  To niches aside and junior bending, not a person or object missing,
  Absorbing all to myself and for this song.	  Absorbing all to myself and for this song.	  Absorbing all to myself and for this song.	  Absorbing all to myself and for this song.
			
  Oxen that rattle the yoke and chain or halt in the leafy shade, what	  Oxen that rattle the yoke and chain or halt in the leafy shade, what	  Oxen that rattle the yoke and chain or halt in the leafy shade, what	  Oxen that rattle the yoke and chain or halt in the leafy shade, what
      is that you express in your eyes?	      is that you express in your eyes?	      is that you express in your eyes?	      is that you express in your eyes?
  It seems to me more than all the print I have read in my life.	  It seems to me more than all the print I have read in my life.	  It seems to me more than all the print I have read in my life.	  It seems to me more than all the print I have read in my life.
			
  My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck on my distant and	  My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck on my distant and	  My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck on my distant and	  My tread scares the wood-drake and wood-duck on my distant and
      day-long ramble,	      day-long ramble,	      day-long ramble,	      day-long ramble,
  They rise together, they slowly circle around.	  They rise together, they slowly circle around.	  They rise together, they slowly circle around.	  They rise together, they slowly circle around.
			
  I believe in those wing'd purposes,	  I believe in those wing'd purposes,	  I believe in those wing'd purposes,	  I believe in those wing'd purposes,
  And acknowledge red, yellow, white, playing within me,	  And acknowledge red, yellow, white, playing within me,	  And acknowledge red, yellow, white, playing within me,	  And acknowledge red, yellow, white, playing within me,
  And consider green and violet and the tufted crown intentional,	  And consider green and violet and the tufted crown intentional,	  And consider green and violet and the tufted crown intentional,	  And consider green and violet and the tufted crown intentional,
  And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is not something else,	  And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is not something else,	  And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is not something else,	  And do not call the tortoise unworthy because she is not something else,
  And the jay in the woods never studied the gamut, yet trills pretty well to me,	  And the jay in the woods never studied the gamut, yet trills pretty well to me,	  And the jay in the woods never studied the gamut, yet trills pretty well to me,	  And the jay in the woods never studied the gamut, yet trills pretty well to me,
  And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of me.	  And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of me.	  And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of me.	  And the look of the bay mare shames silliness out of me.
			
       14	       14	       14	       14
  The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night,	  The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night,	  The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night,	  The wild gander leads his flock through the cool night,
  Ya-honk he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation,	  Ya-honk he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation,	  Ya-honk he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation,	  Ya-honk he says, and sounds it down to me like an invitation,
  The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listening close,	  The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listening close,	  The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listening close,	  The pert may suppose it meaningless, but I listening close,
  Find its purpose and place up there toward the wintry sky.	  Find its purpose and place up there toward the wintry sky.	  Find its purpose and place up there toward the wintry sky.	  Find its purpose and place up there toward the wintry sky.
			
  The sharp-hoof'd moose of the north, the cat on the house-sill, the	  The sharp-hoof'd moose of the north, the cat on the house-sill, the	  The sharp-hoof'd moose of the north, the cat on the house-sill, the	  The sharp-hoof'd moose of the north, the cat on the house-sill, the
      chickadee, the prairie-dog,	      chickadee, the prairie-dog,	      chickadee, the prairie-dog,	      chickadee, the prairie-dog,
  The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,	  The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,	  The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,	  The litter of the grunting sow as they tug at her teats,
  The brood of the turkey-hen and she with her half-spread wings,	  The brood of the turkey-hen and she with her half-spread wings,	  The brood of the turkey-hen and she with her half-spread wings,	  The brood of the turkey-hen and she with her half-spread wings,
  I see in them and myself the same old law.	  I see in them and myself the same old law.	  I see in them and myself the same old law.	  I see in them and myself the same old law.
			
  The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections,	  The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections,	  The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections,	  The press of my foot to the earth springs a hundred affections,
  They scorn the best I can do to relate them.	  They scorn the best I can do to relate them.	  They scorn the best I can do to relate them.	  They scorn the best I can do to relate them.
			
  I am enamour'd of growing out-doors,	  I am enamour'd of growing out-doors,	  I am enamour'd of growing out-doors,	  I am enamour'd of growing out-doors,
  Of men that live among cattle or taste of the ocean or woods,	  Of men that live among cattle or taste of the ocean or woods,	  Of men that live among cattle or taste of the ocean or woods,	  Of men that live among cattle or taste of the ocean or woods,
  Of the builders and steerers of ships and the wielders of axes and	  Of the builders and steerers of ships and the wielders of axes and	  Of the builders and steerers of ships and the wielders of axes and	  Of the builders and steerers of ships and the wielders of axes and
      mauls, and the drivers of horses,	      mauls, and the drivers of horses,	      mauls, and the drivers of horses,	      mauls, and the drivers of horses,
  I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.	  I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.	  I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.	  I can eat and sleep with them week in and week out.
			
  What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me,	  What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me,	  What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me,	  What is commonest, cheapest, nearest, easiest, is Me,
  Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns,	  Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns,	  Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns,	  Me going in for my chances, spending for vast returns,
  Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me,	  Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me,	  Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me,	  Adorning myself to bestow myself on the first that will take me,
  Not asking the sky to come down to my good will,	  Not asking the sky to come down to my good will,	  Not asking the sky to come down to my good will,	  Not asking the sky to come down to my good will,
  Scattering it freely forever.	  Scattering it freely forever.	  Scattering it freely forever.	  Scattering it freely forever.
			
       15	       15	       15	       15
  The pure contralto sings in the organ loft,	  The pure contralto sings in the organ loft,	  The pure contralto sings in the organ loft,	  The pure contralto sings in the organ loft,
  The carpenter dresses his plank, the tongue of his foreplane	  The carpenter dresses his plank, the tongue of his foreplane	  The carpenter dresses his plank, the tongue of his foreplane	  The carpenter dresses his plank, the tongue of his foreplane
      whistles its wild ascending lisp,	      whistles its wild ascending lisp,	      whistles its wild ascending lisp,	      whistles its wild ascending lisp,
  The married and unmarried children ride home to their Thanksgiving dinner,	  The married and unmarried children ride home to their Thanksgiving dinner,	  The married and unmarried children ride home to their Thanksgiving dinner,	  The married and unmarried children ride home to their Thanksgiving dinner,
  The pilot seizes the king-pin, he heaves down with a strong arm,	  The pilot seizes the king-pin, he heaves down with a strong arm,	  The pilot seizes the king-pin, he heaves down with a strong arm,	  The pilot seizes the king-pin, he heaves down with a strong arm,
  The mate stands braced in the whale-boat, lance and harpoon are ready,	  The mate stands braced in the whale-boat, lance and harpoon are ready,	  The mate stands braced in the whale-boat, lance and harpoon are ready,	  The mate stands braced in the whale-boat, lance and harpoon are ready,
  The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious stretches,	  The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious stretches,	  The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious stretches,	  The duck-shooter walks by silent and cautious stretches,
  The deacons are ordain'd with cross'd hands at the altar,	  The deacons are ordain'd with cross'd hands at the altar,	  The deacons are ordain'd with cross'd hands at the altar,	  The deacons are ordain'd with cross'd hands at the altar,
  The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of the big wheel,	  The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of the big wheel,	  The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of the big wheel,	  The spinning-girl retreats and advances to the hum of the big wheel,
  The farmer stops by the bars as he walks on a First-day loafe and	  The farmer stops by the bars as he walks on a First-day loafe and	  The farmer stops by the bars as he walks on a First-day loafe and	  The farmer stops by the bars as he walks on a First-day loafe and
      looks at the oats and rye,	      looks at the oats and rye,	      looks at the oats and rye,	      looks at the oats and rye,
  The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum a confirm'd case,	  The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum a confirm'd case,	  The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum a confirm'd case,	  The lunatic is carried at last to the asylum a confirm'd case,
  (He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in his mother's	  (He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in his mother's	  (He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in his mother's	  (He will never sleep any more as he did in the cot in his mother's
      bed-room;)	      bed-room;)	      bed-room;)	      bed-room;)
  The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works at his case,	  The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works at his case,	  The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works at his case,	  The jour printer with gray head and gaunt jaws works at his case,
  He turns his quid of tobacco while his eyes blurr with the manuscript;	  He turns his quid of tobacco while his eyes blurr with the manuscript;	  He turns his quid of tobacco while his eyes blurr with the manuscript;	  He turns his quid of tobacco while his eyes blurr with the manuscript;
  The malform'd limbs are tied to the surgeon's table,	  The malform'd limbs are tied to the surgeon's table,	  The malform'd limbs are tied to the surgeon's table,	  The malform'd limbs are tied to the surgeon's table,
  What is removed drops horribly in a pail;	  What is removed drops horribly in a pail;	  What is removed drops horribly in a pail;	  What is removed drops horribly in a pail;
  The quadroon girl is sold at the auction-stand, the drunkard nods by	  The quadroon girl is sold at the auction-stand, the drunkard nods by	  The quadroon girl is sold at the auction-stand, the drunkard nods by	  The quadroon girl is sold at the auction-stand, the drunkard nods by
      the bar-room stove,	      the bar-room stove,	      the bar-room stove,	      the bar-room stove,
  The machinist rolls up his sleeves, the policeman travels his beat,	  The machinist rolls up his sleeves, the policeman travels his beat,	  The machinist rolls up his sleeves, the policeman travels his beat,	  The machinist rolls up his sleeves, the policeman travels his beat,
      the gate-keeper marks who pass,	      the gate-keeper marks who pass,	      the gate-keeper marks who pass,	      the gate-keeper marks who pass,
  The young fellow drives the express-wagon, (I love him, though I do	  The young fellow drives the express-wagon, (I love him, though I do	  The young fellow drives the express-wagon, (I love him, though I do	  The young fellow drives the express-wagon, (I love him, though I do
      not know him;)	      not know him;)	      not know him;)	      not know him;)
  The half-breed straps on his light boots to compete in the race,	  The half-breed straps on his light boots to compete in the race,	  The half-breed straps on his light boots to compete in the race,	  The half-breed straps on his light boots to compete in the race,
  The western turkey-shooting draws old and young, some lean on their	  The western turkey-shooting draws old and young, some lean on their	  The western turkey-shooting draws old and young, some lean on their	  The western turkey-shooting draws old and young, some lean on their
      rifles, some sit on logs,	      rifles, some sit on logs,	      rifles, some sit on logs,	      rifles, some sit on logs,
  Out from the crowd steps the marksman, takes his position, levels his piece;	  Out from the crowd steps the marksman, takes his position, levels his piece;	  Out from the crowd steps the marksman, takes his position, levels his piece;	  Out from the crowd steps the marksman, takes his position, levels his piece;
  The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the wharf or levee,	  The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the wharf or levee,	  The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the wharf or levee,	  The groups of newly-come immigrants cover the wharf or levee,
  As the woolly-pates hoe in the sugar-field, the overseer views them	  As the woolly-pates hoe in the sugar-field, the overseer views them	  As the woolly-pates hoe in the sugar-field, the overseer views them	  As the woolly-pates hoe in the sugar-field, the overseer views them
      from his saddle,	      from his saddle,	      from his saddle,	      from his saddle,
  The bugle calls in the ball-room, the gentlemen run for their	  The bugle calls in the ball-room, the gentlemen run for their	  The bugle calls in the ball-room, the gentlemen run for their	  The bugle calls in the ball-room, the gentlemen run for their
      partners, the dancers bow to each other,	      partners, the dancers bow to each other,	      partners, the dancers bow to each other,	      partners, the dancers bow to each other,
  The youth lies awake in the cedar-roof'd garret and harks to the	  The youth lies awake in the cedar-roof'd garret and harks to the	  The youth lies awake in the cedar-roof'd garret and harks to the	  The youth lies awake in the cedar-roof'd garret and harks to the
      musical rain,	      musical rain,	      musical rain,	      musical rain,
  The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the Huron,	  The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the Huron,	  The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the Huron,	  The Wolverine sets traps on the creek that helps fill the Huron,
  The squaw wrapt in her yellow-hemm'd cloth is offering moccasins and	  The squaw wrapt in her yellow-hemm'd cloth is offering moccasins and	  The squaw wrapt in her yellow-hemm'd cloth is offering moccasins and	  The squaw wrapt in her yellow-hemm'd cloth is offering moccasins and
      bead-bags for sale,	      bead-bags for sale,	      bead-bags for sale,	      bead-bags for sale,
  The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with half-shut	  The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with half-shut	  The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with half-shut	  The connoisseur peers along the exhibition-gallery with half-shut
      eyes bent sideways,	      eyes bent sideways,	      eyes bent sideways,	      eyes bent sideways,
  As the deck-hands make fast the steamboat the plank is thrown for	  As the deck-hands make fast the steamboat the plank is thrown for	  As the deck-hands make fast the steamboat the plank is thrown for	  As the deck-hands make fast the steamboat the plank is thrown for
      the shore-going passengers,	      the shore-going passengers,	      the shore-going passengers,	      the shore-going passengers,
  The young sister holds out the skein while the elder sister winds it	  The young sister holds out the skein while the elder sister winds it	  The young sister holds out the skein while the elder sister winds it	  The young sister holds out the skein while the elder sister winds it
      off in a ball, and stops now and then for the knots,	      off in a ball, and stops now and then for the knots,	      off in a ball, and stops now and then for the knots,	      off in a ball, and stops now and then for the knots,
  The one-year wife is recovering and happy having a week ago borne	  The one-year wife is recovering and happy having a week ago borne	  The one-year wife is recovering and happy having a week ago borne	  The one-year wife is recovering and happy having a week ago borne
      her first child,	      her first child,	      her first child,	      her first child,
  The clean-hair'd Yankee girl works with her sewing-machine or in the	  The clean-hair'd Yankee girl works with her sewing-machine or in the	  The clean-hair'd Yankee girl works with her sewing-machine or in the	  The clean-hair'd Yankee girl works with her sewing-machine or in the
      factory or mill,	      factory or mill,	      factory or mill,	      factory or mill,
  The paving-man leans on his two-handed rammer, the reporter's lead	  The paving-man leans on his two-handed rammer, the reporter's lead	  The paving-man leans on his two-handed rammer, the reporter's lead	  The paving-man leans on his two-handed rammer, the reporter's lead
      flies swiftly over the note-book, the sign-painter is lettering	      flies swiftly over the note-book, the sign-painter is lettering	      flies swiftly over the note-book, the sign-painter is lettering	      flies swiftly over the note-book, the sign-painter is lettering
      with blue and gold,	      with blue and gold,	      with blue and gold,	      with blue and gold,
  The canal boy trots on the tow-path, the book-keeper counts at his	  The canal boy trots on the tow-path, the book-keeper counts at his	  The canal boy trots on the tow-path, the book-keeper counts at his	  The canal boy trots on the tow-path, the book-keeper counts at his
      desk, the shoemaker waxes his thread,	      desk, the shoemaker waxes his thread,	      desk, the shoemaker waxes his thread,	      desk, the shoemaker waxes his thread,
  The conductor beats time for the band and all the performers follow him,	  The conductor beats time for the band and all the performers follow him,	  The conductor beats time for the band and all the performers follow him,	  The conductor beats time for the band and all the performers follow him,
  The child is baptized, the convert is making his first professions,	  The child is baptized, the convert is making his first professions,	  The child is baptized, the convert is making his first professions,	  The child is baptized, the convert is making his first professions,
  The regatta is spread on the bay, the race is begun, (how the white	  The regatta is spread on the bay, the race is begun, (how the white	  The regatta is spread on the bay, the race is begun, (how the white	  The regatta is spread on the bay, the race is begun, (how the white
      sails sparkle!)	      sails sparkle!)	      sails sparkle!)	      sails sparkle!)
  The drover watching his drove sings out to them that would stray,	  The drover watching his drove sings out to them that would stray,	  The drover watching his drove sings out to them that would stray,	  The drover watching his drove sings out to them that would stray,
  The pedler sweats with his pack on his back, (the purchaser higgling	  The pedler sweats with his pack on his back, (the purchaser higgling	  The pedler sweats with his pack on his back, (the purchaser higgling	  The pedler sweats with his pack on his back, (the purchaser higgling
      about the odd cent;)	      about the odd cent;)	      about the odd cent;)	      about the odd cent;)
  The bride unrumples her white dress, the minute-hand of the clock	  The bride unrumples her white dress, the minute-hand of the clock	  The bride unrumples her white dress, the minute-hand of the clock	  The bride unrumples her white dress, the minute-hand of the clock
      moves slowly,	      moves slowly,	      moves slowly,	      moves slowly,
  The opium-eater reclines with rigid head and just-open'd lips,	  The opium-eater reclines with rigid head and just-open'd lips,	  The opium-eater reclines with rigid head and just-open'd lips,	  The opium-eater reclines with rigid head and just-open'd lips,
  The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on her tipsy and	  The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on her tipsy and	  The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on her tipsy and	  The prostitute draggles her shawl, her bonnet bobs on her tipsy and
      pimpled neck,	      pimpled neck,	      pimpled neck,	      pimpled neck,
  The crowd laugh at her blackguard oaths, the men jeer and wink to	  The crowd laugh at her blackguard oaths, the men jeer and wink to	  The crowd laugh at her blackguard oaths, the men jeer and wink to	  The crowd laugh at her blackguard oaths, the men jeer and wink to
      each other,	      each other,	      each other,	      each other,
  (Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths nor jeer you;)	  (Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths nor jeer you;)	  (Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths nor jeer you;)	  (Miserable! I do not laugh at your oaths nor jeer you;)
  The President holding a cabinet council is surrounded by the great	  The President holding a cabinet council is surrounded by the great	  The President holding a cabinet council is surrounded by the great	  The President holding a cabinet council is surrounded by the great
      Secretaries,	      Secretaries,	      Secretaries,	      Secretaries,
  On the piazza walk three matrons stately and friendly with twined arms,	  On the piazza walk three matrons stately and friendly with twined arms,	  On the piazza walk three matrons stately and friendly with twined arms,	  On the piazza walk three matrons stately and friendly with twined arms,
  The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of halibut in the hold,	  The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of halibut in the hold,	  The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of halibut in the hold,	  The crew of the fish-smack pack repeated layers of halibut in the hold,
  The Missourian crosses the plains toting his wares and his cattle,	  The Missourian crosses the plains toting his wares and his cattle,	  The Missourian crosses the plains toting his wares and his cattle,	  The Missourian crosses the plains toting his wares and his cattle,
  As the fare-collector goes through the train he gives notice by the	  As the fare-collector goes through the train he gives notice by the	  As the fare-collector goes through the train he gives notice by the	  As the fare-collector goes through the train he gives notice by the
      jingling of loose change,	      jingling of loose change,	      jingling of loose change,	      jingling of loose change,
  The floor-men are laying the floor, the tinners are tinning the	  The floor-men are laying the floor, the tinners are tinning the	  The floor-men are laying the floor, the tinners are tinning the	  The floor-men are laying the floor, the tinners are tinning the
      roof, the masons are calling for mortar,	      roof, the masons are calling for mortar,	      roof, the masons are calling for mortar,	      roof, the masons are calling for mortar,
  In single file each shouldering his hod pass onward the laborers;	  In single file each shouldering his hod pass onward the laborers;	  In single file each shouldering his hod pass onward the laborers;	  In single file each shouldering his hod pass onward the laborers;
  Seasons pursuing each other the indescribable crowd is gather'd, it	  Seasons pursuing each other the indescribable crowd is gather'd, it	  Seasons pursuing each other the indescribable crowd is gather'd, it	  Seasons pursuing each other the indescribable crowd is gather'd, it
      is the fourth of Seventh-month, (what salutes of cannon and small arms!)	      is the fourth of Seventh-month, (what salutes of cannon and small arms!)	      is the fourth of Seventh-month, (what salutes of cannon and small arms!)	      is the fourth of Seventh-month, (what salutes of cannon and small arms!)
  Seasons pursuing each other the plougher ploughs, the mower mows,	  Seasons pursuing each other the plougher ploughs, the mower mows,	  Seasons pursuing each other the plougher ploughs, the mower mows,	  Seasons pursuing each other the plougher ploughs, the mower mows,
      and the winter-grain falls in the ground;	      and the winter-grain falls in the ground;	      and the winter-grain falls in the ground;	      and the winter-grain falls in the ground;
  Off on the lakes the pike-fisher watches and waits by the hole in	  Off on the lakes the pike-fisher watches and waits by the hole in	  Off on the lakes the pike-fisher watches and waits by the hole in	  Off on the lakes the pike-fisher watches and waits by the hole in
      the frozen surface,	      the frozen surface,	      the frozen surface,	      the frozen surface,
  The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter strikes deep	  The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter strikes deep	  The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter strikes deep	  The stumps stand thick round the clearing, the squatter strikes deep
      with his axe,	      with his axe,	      with his axe,	      with his axe,
  Flatboatmen make fast towards dusk near the cotton-wood or pecan-trees,	  Flatboatmen make fast towards dusk near the cotton-wood or pecan-trees,	  Flatboatmen make fast towards dusk near the cotton-wood or pecan-trees,	  Flatboatmen make fast towards dusk near the cotton-wood or pecan-trees,
  Coon-seekers go through the regions of the Red river or through	  Coon-seekers go through the regions of the Red river or through	  Coon-seekers go through the regions of the Red river or through	  Coon-seekers go through the regions of the Red river or through
      those drain'd by the Tennessee, or through those of the Arkansas,	      those drain'd by the Tennessee, or through those of the Arkansas,	      those drain'd by the Tennessee, or through those of the Arkansas,	      those drain'd by the Tennessee, or through those of the Arkansas,
  Torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chattahooche or Altamahaw,	  Torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chattahooche or Altamahaw,	  Torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chattahooche or Altamahaw,	  Torches shine in the dark that hangs on the Chattahooche or Altamahaw,
  Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and great-grandsons	  Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and great-grandsons	  Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and great-grandsons	  Patriarchs sit at supper with sons and grandsons and great-grandsons
      around them,	      around them,	      around them,	      around them,
  In walls of adobie, in canvas tents, rest hunters and trappers after	  In walls of adobie, in canvas tents, rest hunters and trappers after	  In walls of adobie, in canvas tents, rest hunters and trappers after	  In walls of adobie, in canvas tents, rest hunters and trappers after
      their day's sport,	      their day's sport,	      their day's sport,	      their day's sport,
  The city sleeps and the country sleeps,	  The city sleeps and the country sleeps,	  The city sleeps and the country sleeps,	  The city sleeps and the country sleeps,
  The living sleep for their time, the dead sleep for their time,	  The living sleep for their time, the dead sleep for their time,	  The living sleep for their time, the dead sleep for their time,	  The living sleep for their time, the dead sleep for their time,
  The old husband sleeps by his wife and the young husband sleeps by his wife;	  The old husband sleeps by his wife and the young husband sleeps by his wife;	  The old husband sleeps by his wife and the young husband sleeps by his wife;	  The old husband sleeps by his wife and the young husband sleeps by his wife;
  And these tend inward to me, and I tend outward to them,	  And these tend inward to me, and I tend outward to them,	  And these tend inward to me, and I tend outward to them,	  And these tend inward to me, and I tend outward to them,
  And such as it is to be of these more or less I am,	  And such as it is to be of these more or less I am,	  And such as it is to be of these more or less I am,	  And such as it is to be of these more or less I am,
  And of these one and all I weave the song of myself.	  And of these one and all I weave the song of myself.	  And of these one and all I weave the song of myself.	  And of these one and all I weave the song of myself.
			
       16	       16	       16	       16
  I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise,	  I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise,	  I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise,	  I am of old and young, of the foolish as much as the wise,
  Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,	  Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,	  Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,	  Regardless of others, ever regardful of others,
  Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,	  Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,	  Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,	  Maternal as well as paternal, a child as well as a man,
  Stuff'd with the stuff that is coarse and stuff'd with the stuff	  Stuff'd with the stuff that is coarse and stuff'd with the stuff	  Stuff'd with the stuff that is coarse and stuff'd with the stuff	  Stuff'd with the stuff that is coarse and stuff'd with the stuff
      that is fine,	      that is fine,	      that is fine,	      that is fine,
  One of the Nation of many nations, the smallest the same and the	  One of the Nation of many nations, the smallest the same and the	  One of the Nation of many nations, the smallest the same and the	  One of the Nation of many nations, the smallest the same and the
      largest the same,	      largest the same,	      largest the same,	      largest the same,
  A Southerner soon as a Northerner, a planter nonchalant and	  A Southerner soon as a Northerner, a planter nonchalant and	  A Southerner soon as a Northerner, a planter nonchalant and	  A Southerner soon as a Northerner, a planter nonchalant and
      hospitable down by the Oconee I live,	      hospitable down by the Oconee I live,	      hospitable down by the Oconee I live,	      hospitable down by the Oconee I live,
  A Yankee bound my own way ready for trade, my joints the limberest	  A Yankee bound my own way ready for trade, my joints the limberest	  A Yankee bound my own way ready for trade, my joints the limberest	  A Yankee bound my own way ready for trade, my joints the limberest
      joints on earth and the sternest joints on earth,	      joints on earth and the sternest joints on earth,	      joints on earth and the sternest joints on earth,	      joints on earth and the sternest joints on earth,
  A Kentuckian walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my deer-skin	  A Kentuckian walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my deer-skin	  A Kentuckian walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my deer-skin	  A Kentuckian walking the vale of the Elkhorn in my deer-skin
      leggings, a Louisianian or Georgian,	      leggings, a Louisianian or Georgian,	      leggings, a Louisianian or Georgian,	      leggings, a Louisianian or Georgian,
  A boatman over lakes or bays or along coasts, a Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye;	  A boatman over lakes or bays or along coasts, a Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye;	  A boatman over lakes or bays or along coasts, a Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye;	  A boatman over lakes or bays or along coasts, a Hoosier, Badger, Buckeye;
  At home on Kanadian snow-shoes or up in the bush, or with fishermen	  At home on Kanadian snow-shoes or up in the bush, or with fishermen	  At home on Kanadian snow-shoes or up in the bush, or with fishermen	  At home on Kanadian snow-shoes or up in the bush, or with fishermen
      off Newfoundland,	      off Newfoundland,	      off Newfoundland,	      off Newfoundland,
  At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest and tacking,	  At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest and tacking,	  At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest and tacking,	  At home in the fleet of ice-boats, sailing with the rest and tacking,
  At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the	  At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the	  At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the	  At home on the hills of Vermont or in the woods of Maine, or the
      Texan ranch,	      Texan ranch,	      Texan ranch,	      Texan ranch,
  Comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners, (loving	  Comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners, (loving	  Comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners, (loving	  Comrade of Californians, comrade of free North-Westerners, (loving
      their big proportions,)	      their big proportions,)	      their big proportions,)	      their big proportions,)
  Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen, comrade of all who shake hands	  Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen, comrade of all who shake hands	  Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen, comrade of all who shake hands	  Comrade of raftsmen and coalmen, comrade of all who shake hands
      and welcome to drink and meat,	      and welcome to drink and meat,	      and welcome to drink and meat,	      and welcome to drink and meat,
  A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest,	  A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest,	  A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest,	  A learner with the simplest, a teacher of the thoughtfullest,
  A novice beginning yet experient of myriads of seasons,	  A novice beginning yet experient of myriads of seasons,	  A novice beginning yet experient of myriads of seasons,	  A novice beginning yet experient of myriads of seasons,
  Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion,	  Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion,	  Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion,	  Of every hue and caste am I, of every rank and religion,
  A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker,	  A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker,	  A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker,	  A farmer, mechanic, artist, gentleman, sailor, quaker,
  Prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest.	  Prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest.	  Prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest.	  Prisoner, fancy-man, rowdy, lawyer, physician, priest.
			
  I resist any thing better than my own diversity,	  I resist any thing better than my own diversity,	  I resist any thing better than my own diversity,	  I resist any thing better than my own diversity,
  Breathe the air but leave plenty after me,	  Breathe the air but leave plenty after me,	  Breathe the air but leave plenty after me,	  Breathe the air but leave plenty after me,
  And am not stuck up, and am in my place.	  And am not stuck up, and am in my place.	  And am not stuck up, and am in my place.	  And am not stuck up, and am in my place.
			
  (The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place,	  (The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place,	  (The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place,	  (The moth and the fish-eggs are in their place,
  The bright suns I see and the dark suns I cannot see are in their place,	  The bright suns I see and the dark suns I cannot see are in their place,	  The bright suns I see and the dark suns I cannot see are in their place,	  The bright suns I see and the dark suns I cannot see are in their place,
  The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.)	  The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.)	  The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.)	  The palpable is in its place and the impalpable is in its place.)
			
       17	       17	       17	       17
  These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands, they	  These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands, they	  These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands, they	  These are really the thoughts of all men in all ages and lands, they
      are not original with me,	      are not original with me,	      are not original with me,	      are not original with me,
  If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing, or next to nothing,	  If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing, or next to nothing,	  If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing, or next to nothing,	  If they are not yours as much as mine they are nothing, or next to nothing,
  If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they are nothing,	  If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they are nothing,	  If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they are nothing,	  If they are not the riddle and the untying of the riddle they are nothing,
  If they are not just as close as they are distant they are nothing.	  If they are not just as close as they are distant they are nothing.	  If they are not just as close as they are distant they are nothing.	  If they are not just as close as they are distant they are nothing.
			
  This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the water is,	  This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the water is,	  This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the water is,	  This is the grass that grows wherever the land is and the water is,
  This the common air that bathes the globe.	  This the common air that bathes the globe.	  This the common air that bathes the globe.	  This the common air that bathes the globe.
			
       18	       18	       18	       18
  With music strong I come, with my cornets and my drums,	  With music strong I come, with my cornets and my drums,	  With music strong I come, with my cornets and my drums,	  With music strong I come, with my cornets and my drums,
  I play not marches for accepted victors only, I play marches for	  I play not marches for accepted victors only, I play marches for	  I play not marches for accepted victors only, I play marches for	  I play not marches for accepted victors only, I play marches for
      conquer'd and slain persons.	      conquer'd and slain persons.	      conquer'd and slain persons.	      conquer'd and slain persons.
			
  Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?	  Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?	  Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?	  Have you heard that it was good to gain the day?
  I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit	  I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit	  I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit	  I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit
      in which they are won.	      in which they are won.	      in which they are won.	      in which they are won.
			
  I beat and pound for the dead,	  I beat and pound for the dead,	  I beat and pound for the dead,	  I beat and pound for the dead,
  I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them.	  I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them.	  I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them.	  I blow through my embouchures my loudest and gayest for them.
			
  Vivas to those who have fail'd!	  Vivas to those who have fail'd!	  Vivas to those who have fail'd!	  Vivas to those who have fail'd!
  And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!	  And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!	  And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!	  And to those whose war-vessels sank in the sea!
  And to those themselves who sank in the sea!	  And to those themselves who sank in the sea!	  And to those themselves who sank in the sea!	  And to those themselves who sank in the sea!
  And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes!	  And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes!	  And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes!	  And to all generals that lost engagements, and all overcome heroes!
  And the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known!	  And the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known!	  And the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known!	  And the numberless unknown heroes equal to the greatest heroes known!
			
       19	       19	       19	       19
  This is the meal equally set, this the meat for natural hunger,	  This is the meal equally set, this the meat for natural hunger,	  This is the meal equally set, this the meat for natural hunger,	  This is the meal equally set, this the meat for natural hunger,
  It is for the wicked just same as the righteous, I make appointments	  It is for the wicked just same as the righteous, I make appointments	  It is for the wicked just same as the righteous, I make appointments	  It is for the wicked just same as the righteous, I make appointments
      with all,	      with all,	      with all,	      with all,
  I will not have a single person slighted or left away,	  I will not have a single person slighted or left away,	  I will not have a single person slighted or left away,	  I will not have a single person slighted or left away,
  The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited,	  The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited,	  The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited,	  The kept-woman, sponger, thief, are hereby invited,
  The heavy-lipp'd slave is invited, the venerealee is invited;	  The heavy-lipp'd slave is invited, the venerealee is invited;	  The heavy-lipp'd slave is invited, the venerealee is invited;	  The heavy-lipp'd slave is invited, the venerealee is invited;
  There shall be no difference between them and the rest.	  There shall be no difference between them and the rest.	  There shall be no difference between them and the rest.	  There shall be no difference between them and the rest.
			
  This is the press of a bashful hand, this the float and odor of hair,	  This is the press of a bashful hand, this the float and odor of hair,	  This is the press of a bashful hand, this the float and odor of hair,	  This is the press of a bashful hand, this the float and odor of hair,
  This the touch of my lips to yours, this the murmur of yearning,	  This the touch of my lips to yours, this the murmur of yearning,	  This the touch of my lips to yours, this the murmur of yearning,	  This the touch of my lips to yours, this the murmur of yearning,
  This the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,	  This the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,	  This the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,	  This the far-off depth and height reflecting my own face,
  This the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again.	  This the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again.	  This the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again.	  This the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet again.
			
  Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?	  Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?	  Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?	  Do you guess I have some intricate purpose?
  Well I have, for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the	  Well I have, for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the	  Well I have, for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the	  Well I have, for the Fourth-month showers have, and the mica on the
      side of a rock has.	      side of a rock has.	      side of a rock has.	      side of a rock has.
			
  Do you take it I would astonish?	  Do you take it I would astonish?	  Do you take it I would astonish?	  Do you take it I would astonish?
  Does the daylight astonish? does the early redstart twittering	  Does the daylight astonish? does the early redstart twittering	  Does the daylight astonish? does the early redstart twittering	  Does the daylight astonish? does the early redstart twittering
      through the woods?	      through the woods?	      through the woods?	      through the woods?
  Do I astonish more than they?	  Do I astonish more than they?	  Do I astonish more than they?	  Do I astonish more than they?
			
  This hour I tell things in confidence,	  This hour I tell things in confidence,	  This hour I tell things in confidence,	  This hour I tell things in confidence,
  I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you.	  I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you.	  I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you.	  I might not tell everybody, but I will tell you.
			
       20	       20	       20	       20
  Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude;	  Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude;	  Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude;	  Who goes there? hankering, gross, mystical, nude;
  How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?	  How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?	  How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?	  How is it I extract strength from the beef I eat?
			
  What is a man anyhow? what am I? what are you?	  What is a man anyhow? what am I? what are you?	  What is a man anyhow? what am I? what are you?	  What is a man anyhow? what am I? what are you?
			
  All I mark as my own you shall offset it with your own,	  All I mark as my own you shall offset it with your own,	  All I mark as my own you shall offset it with your own,	  All I mark as my own you shall offset it with your own,
  Else it were time lost listening to me.	  Else it were time lost listening to me.	  Else it were time lost listening to me.	  Else it were time lost listening to me.
			
  I do not snivel that snivel the world over,	  I do not snivel that snivel the world over,	  I do not snivel that snivel the world over,	  I do not snivel that snivel the world over,
  That months are vacuums and the ground but wallow and filth.	  That months are vacuums and the ground but wallow and filth.	  That months are vacuums and the ground but wallow and filth.	  That months are vacuums and the ground but wallow and filth.
			
  Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids, conformity	  Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids, conformity	  Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids, conformity	  Whimpering and truckling fold with powders for invalids, conformity
      goes to the fourth-remov'd,	      goes to the fourth-remov'd,	      goes to the fourth-remov'd,	      goes to the fourth-remov'd,
  I wear my hat as I please indoors or out.	  I wear my hat as I please indoors or out.	  I wear my hat as I please indoors or out.	  I wear my hat as I please indoors or out.
			
  Why should I pray? why should I venerate and be ceremonious?	  Why should I pray? why should I venerate and be ceremonious?	  Why should I pray? why should I venerate and be ceremonious?	  Why should I pray? why should I venerate and be ceremonious?
			
  Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair, counsel'd with	  Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair, counsel'd with	  Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair, counsel'd with	  Having pried through the strata, analyzed to a hair, counsel'd with
      doctors and calculated close,	      doctors and calculated close,	      doctors and calculated close,	      doctors and calculated close,
  I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones.	  I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones.	  I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones.	  I find no sweeter fat than sticks to my own bones.
			
  In all people I see myself, none more and not one a barley-corn less,	  In all people I see myself, none more and not one a barley-corn less,	  In all people I see myself, none more and not one a barley-corn less,	  In all people I see myself, none more and not one a barley-corn less,
  And the good or bad I say of myself I say of them.	  And the good or bad I say of myself I say of them.	  And the good or bad I say of myself I say of them.	  And the good or bad I say of myself I say of them.
			
  I know I am solid and sound,	  I know I am solid and sound,	  I know I am solid and sound,	  I know I am solid and sound,
  To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow,	  To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow,	  To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow,	  To me the converging objects of the universe perpetually flow,
  All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.	  All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.	  All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.	  All are written to me, and I must get what the writing means.
			
  I know I am deathless,	  I know I am deathless,	  I know I am deathless,	  I know I am deathless,
  I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by a carpenter's compass,	  I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by a carpenter's compass,	  I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by a carpenter's compass,	  I know this orbit of mine cannot be swept by a carpenter's compass,
  I know I shall not pass like a child's carlacue cut with a burnt	  I know I shall not pass like a child's carlacue cut with a burnt	  I know I shall not pass like a child's carlacue cut with a burnt	  I know I shall not pass like a child's carlacue cut with a burnt
      stick at night.	      stick at night.	      stick at night.	      stick at night.
			
  I know I am august,	  I know I am august,	  I know I am august,	  I know I am august,
  I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood,	  I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood,	  I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood,	  I do not trouble my spirit to vindicate itself or be understood,
  I see that the elementary laws never apologize,	  I see that the elementary laws never apologize,	  I see that the elementary laws never apologize,	  I see that the elementary laws never apologize,
  (I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by,	  (I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by,	  (I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by,	  (I reckon I behave no prouder than the level I plant my house by,
      after all.)	      after all.)	      after all.)	      after all.)
			
  I exist as I am, that is enough,	  I exist as I am, that is enough,	  I exist as I am, that is enough,	  I exist as I am, that is enough,
  If no other in the world be aware I sit content,	  If no other in the world be aware I sit content,	  If no other in the world be aware I sit content,	  If no other in the world be aware I sit content,
  And if each and all be aware I sit content.	  And if each and all be aware I sit content.	  And if each and all be aware I sit content.	  And if each and all be aware I sit content.
			
  One world is aware and by far the largest to me, and that is myself,	  One world is aware and by far the largest to me, and that is myself,	  One world is aware and by far the largest to me, and that is myself,	  One world is aware and by far the largest to me, and that is myself,
  And whether I come to my own to-day or in ten thousand or ten	  And whether I come to my own to-day or in ten thousand or ten	  And whether I come to my own to-day or in ten thousand or ten	  And whether I come to my own to-day or in ten thousand or ten
      million years,	      million years,	      million years,	      million years,
  I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait.	  I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait.	  I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait.	  I can cheerfully take it now, or with equal cheerfulness I can wait.
			
  My foothold is tenon'd and mortis'd in granite,	  My foothold is tenon'd and mortis'd in granite,	  My foothold is tenon'd and mortis'd in granite,	  My foothold is tenon'd and mortis'd in granite,
  I laugh at what you call dissolution,	  I laugh at what you call dissolution,	  I laugh at what you call dissolution,	  I laugh at what you call dissolution,
  And I know the amplitude of time.	  And I know the amplitude of time.	  And I know the amplitude of time.	  And I know the amplitude of time.
			
       21	       21	       21	       21
  I am the poet of the Body and I am the poet of the Soul,	  I am the poet of the Body and I am the poet of the Soul,	  I am the poet of the Body and I am the poet of the Soul,	  I am the poet of the Body and I am the poet of the Soul,
  The pleasures of heaven are with me and the pains of hell are with me,	  The pleasures of heaven are with me and the pains of hell are with me,	  The pleasures of heaven are with me and the pains of hell are with me,	  The pleasures of heaven are with me and the pains of hell are with me,
  The first I graft and increase upon myself, the latter I translate	  The first I graft and increase upon myself, the latter I translate	  The first I graft and increase upon myself, the latter I translate	  The first I graft and increase upon myself, the latter I translate
      into new tongue.	      into new tongue.	      into new tongue.	      into new tongue.
			
  I am the poet of the woman the same as the man,	  I am the poet of the woman the same as the man,	  I am the poet of the woman the same as the man,	  I am the poet of the woman the same as the man,
  And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man,	  And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man,	  And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man,	  And I say it is as great to be a woman as to be a man,
  And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men.	  And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men.	  And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men.	  And I say there is nothing greater than the mother of men.
			
  I chant the chant of dilation or pride,	  I chant the chant of dilation or pride,	  I chant the chant of dilation or pride,	  I chant the chant of dilation or pride,
  We have had ducking and deprecating about enough,	  We have had ducking and deprecating about enough,	  We have had ducking and deprecating about enough,	  We have had ducking and deprecating about enough,
  I show that size is only development.	  I show that size is only development.	  I show that size is only development.	  I show that size is only development.
			
  Have you outstript the rest? are you the President?	  Have you outstript the rest? are you the President?	  Have you outstript the rest? are you the President?	  Have you outstript the rest? are you the President?
  It is a trifle, they will more than arrive there every one, and	  It is a trifle, they will more than arrive there every one, and	  It is a trifle, they will more than arrive there every one, and	  It is a trifle, they will more than arrive there every one, and
      still pass on.	      still pass on.	      still pass on.	      still pass on.
			
  I am he that walks with the tender and growing night,	  I am he that walks with the tender and growing night,	  I am he that walks with the tender and growing night,	  I am he that walks with the tender and growing night,
  I call to the earth and sea half-held by the night.	  I call to the earth and sea half-held by the night.	  I call to the earth and sea half-held by the night.	  I call to the earth and sea half-held by the night.
			
  Press close bare-bosom'd night--press close magnetic nourishing night!	  Press close bare-bosom'd night--press close magnetic nourishing night!	  Press close bare-bosom'd night--press close magnetic nourishing night!	  Press close bare-bosom'd night--press close magnetic nourishing night!
  Night of south winds--night of the large few stars!	  Night of south winds--night of the large few stars!	  Night of south winds--night of the large few stars!	  Night of south winds--night of the large few stars!
  Still nodding night--mad naked summer night.	  Still nodding night--mad naked summer night.	  Still nodding night--mad naked summer night.	  Still nodding night--mad naked summer night.
			
  Smile O voluptuous cool-breath'd earth!	  Smile O voluptuous cool-breath'd earth!	  Smile O voluptuous cool-breath'd earth!	  Smile O voluptuous cool-breath'd earth!
  Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees!	  Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees!	  Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees!	  Earth of the slumbering and liquid trees!
  Earth of departed sunset--earth of the mountains misty-topt!	  Earth of departed sunset--earth of the mountains misty-topt!	  Earth of departed sunset--earth of the mountains misty-topt!	  Earth of departed sunset--earth of the mountains misty-topt!
  Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon just tinged with blue!	  Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon just tinged with blue!	  Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon just tinged with blue!	  Earth of the vitreous pour of the full moon just tinged with blue!
  Earth of shine and dark mottling the tide of the river!	  Earth of shine and dark mottling the tide of the river!	  Earth of shine and dark mottling the tide of the river!	  Earth of shine and dark mottling the tide of the river!
  Earth of the limpid gray of clouds brighter and clearer for my sake!	  Earth of the limpid gray of clouds brighter and clearer for my sake!	  Earth of the limpid gray of clouds brighter and clearer for my sake!	  Earth of the limpid gray of clouds brighter and clearer for my sake!
  Far-swooping elbow'd earth--rich apple-blossom'd earth!	  Far-swooping elbow'd earth--rich apple-blossom'd earth!	  Far-swooping elbow'd earth--rich apple-blossom'd earth!	  Far-swooping elbow'd earth--rich apple-blossom'd earth!
  Smile, for your lover comes.	  Smile, for your lover comes.	  Smile, for your lover comes.	  Smile, for your lover comes.
			
  Prodigal, you have given me love--therefore I to you give love!	  Prodigal, you have given me love--therefore I to you give love!	  Prodigal, you have given me love--therefore I to you give love!	  Prodigal, you have given me love--therefore I to you give love!
  O unspeakable passionate love.	  O unspeakable passionate love.	  O unspeakable passionate love.	  O unspeakable passionate love.
			
       22	       22	       22	       22
  You sea! I resign myself to you also--I guess what you mean,	  You sea! I resign myself to you also--I guess what you mean,	  You sea! I resign myself to you also--I guess what you mean,	  You sea! I resign myself to you also--I guess what you mean,
  I behold from the beach your crooked fingers,	  I behold from the beach your crooked fingers,	  I behold from the beach your crooked fingers,	  I behold from the beach your crooked fingers,
  I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me,	  I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me,	  I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me,	  I believe you refuse to go back without feeling of me,
  We must have a turn together, I undress, hurry me out of sight of the land,	  We must have a turn together, I undress, hurry me out of sight of the land,	  We must have a turn together, I undress, hurry me out of sight of the land,	  We must have a turn together, I undress, hurry me out of sight of the land,
  Cushion me soft, rock me in billowy drowse,	  Cushion me soft, rock me in billowy drowse,	  Cushion me soft, rock me in billowy drowse,	  Cushion me soft, rock me in billowy drowse,
  Dash me with amorous wet, I can repay you.	  Dash me with amorous wet, I can repay you.	  Dash me with amorous wet, I can repay you.	  Dash me with amorous wet, I can repay you.
			
  Sea of stretch'd ground-swells,	  Sea of stretch'd ground-swells,	  Sea of stretch'd ground-swells,	  Sea of stretch'd ground-swells,
  Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths,	  Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths,	  Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths,	  Sea breathing broad and convulsive breaths,
  Sea of the brine of life and of unshovell'd yet always-ready graves,	  Sea of the brine of life and of unshovell'd yet always-ready graves,	  Sea of the brine of life and of unshovell'd yet always-ready graves,	  Sea of the brine of life and of unshovell'd yet always-ready graves,
  Howler and scooper of storms, capricious and dainty sea,	  Howler and scooper of storms, capricious and dainty sea,	  Howler and scooper of storms, capricious and dainty sea,	  Howler and scooper of storms, capricious and dainty sea,
  I am integral with you, I too am of one phase and of all phases.	  I am integral with you, I too am of one phase and of all phases.	  I am integral with you, I too am of one phase and of all phases.	  I am integral with you, I too am of one phase and of all phases.
			
  Partaker of influx and efflux I, extoller of hate and conciliation,	  Partaker of influx and efflux I, extoller of hate and conciliation,	  Partaker of influx and efflux I, extoller of hate and conciliation,	  Partaker of influx and efflux I, extoller of hate and conciliation,
  Extoller of amies and those that sleep in each others' arms.	  Extoller of amies and those that sleep in each others' arms.	  Extoller of amies and those that sleep in each others' arms.	  Extoller of amies and those that sleep in each others' arms.
			
  I am he attesting sympathy,	  I am he attesting sympathy,	  I am he attesting sympathy,	  I am he attesting sympathy,
  (Shall I make my list of things in the house and skip the house that	  (Shall I make my list of things in the house and skip the house that	  (Shall I make my list of things in the house and skip the house that	  (Shall I make my list of things in the house and skip the house that
      supports them?)	      supports them?)	      supports them?)	      supports them?)
			
  I am not the poet of goodness only, I do not decline to be the poet	  I am not the poet of goodness only, I do not decline to be the poet	  I am not the poet of goodness only, I do not decline to be the poet	  I am not the poet of goodness only, I do not decline to be the poet
      of wickedness also.	      of wickedness also.	      of wickedness also.	      of wickedness also.
			
  What blurt is this about virtue and about vice?	  What blurt is this about virtue and about vice?	  What blurt is this about virtue and about vice?	  What blurt is this about virtue and about vice?
  Evil propels me and reform of evil propels me, I stand indifferent,	  Evil propels me and reform of evil propels me, I stand indifferent,	  Evil propels me and reform of evil propels me, I stand indifferent,	  Evil propels me and reform of evil propels me, I stand indifferent,
  My gait is no fault-finder's or rejecter's gait,	  My gait is no fault-finder's or rejecter's gait,	  My gait is no fault-finder's or rejecter's gait,	  My gait is no fault-finder's or rejecter's gait,
  I moisten the roots of all that has grown.	  I moisten the roots of all that has grown.	  I moisten the roots of all that has grown.	  I moisten the roots of all that has grown.
			
  Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging pregnancy?	  Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging pregnancy?	  Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging pregnancy?	  Did you fear some scrofula out of the unflagging pregnancy?
  Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be work'd over and rectified?	  Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be work'd over and rectified?	  Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be work'd over and rectified?	  Did you guess the celestial laws are yet to be work'd over and rectified?
			
  I find one side a balance and the antipedal side a balance,	  I find one side a balance and the antipedal side a balance,	  I find one side a balance and the antipedal side a balance,	  I find one side a balance and the antipedal side a balance,
  Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine,	  Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine,	  Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine,	  Soft doctrine as steady help as stable doctrine,
  Thoughts and deeds of the present our rouse and early start.	  Thoughts and deeds of the present our rouse and early start.	  Thoughts and deeds of the present our rouse and early start.	  Thoughts and deeds of the present our rouse and early start.
			
  This minute that comes to me over the past decillions,	  This minute that comes to me over the past decillions,	  This minute that comes to me over the past decillions,	  This minute that comes to me over the past decillions,
  There is no better than it and now.	  There is no better than it and now.	  There is no better than it and now.	  There is no better than it and now.
			
  What behaved well in the past or behaves well to-day is not such wonder,	  What behaved well in the past or behaves well to-day is not such wonder,	  What behaved well in the past or behaves well to-day is not such wonder,	  What behaved well in the past or behaves well to-day is not such wonder,
  The wonder is always and always how there can be a mean man or an infidel.	  The wonder is always and always how there can be a mean man or an infidel.	  The wonder is always and always how there can be a mean man or an infidel.	  The wonder is always and always how there can be a mean man or an infidel.
			
       23	       23	       23	       23
  Endless unfolding of words of ages!	  Endless unfolding of words of ages!	  Endless unfolding of words of ages!	  Endless unfolding of words of ages!
  And mine a word of the modern, the word En-Masse.	  And mine a word of the modern, the word En-Masse.	  And mine a word of the modern, the word En-Masse.	  And mine a word of the modern, the word En-Masse.
			
  A word of the faith that never balks,	  A word of the faith that never balks,	  A word of the faith that never balks,	  A word of the faith that never balks,
  Here or henceforward it is all the same to me, I accept Time absolutely.	  Here or henceforward it is all the same to me, I accept Time absolutely.	  Here or henceforward it is all the same to me, I accept Time absolutely.	  Here or henceforward it is all the same to me, I accept Time absolutely.
			
  It alone is without flaw, it alone rounds and completes all,	  It alone is without flaw, it alone rounds and completes all,	  It alone is without flaw, it alone rounds and completes all,	  It alone is without flaw, it alone rounds and completes all,
  That mystic baffling wonder alone completes all.	  That mystic baffling wonder alone completes all.	  That mystic baffling wonder alone completes all.	  That mystic baffling wonder alone completes all.
			
  I accept Reality and dare not question it,	  I accept Reality and dare not question it,	  I accept Reality and dare not question it,	  I accept Reality and dare not question it,
  Materialism first and last imbuing.	  Materialism first and last imbuing.	  Materialism first and last imbuing.	  Materialism first and last imbuing.
			
  Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demonstration!	  Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demonstration!	  Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demonstration!	  Hurrah for positive science! long live exact demonstration!
  Fetch stonecrop mixt with cedar and branches of lilac,	  Fetch stonecrop mixt with cedar and branches of lilac,	  Fetch stonecrop mixt with cedar and branches of lilac,	  Fetch stonecrop mixt with cedar and branches of lilac,
  This is the lexicographer, this the chemist, this made a grammar of	  This is the lexicographer, this the chemist, this made a grammar of	  This is the lexicographer, this the chemist, this made a grammar of	  This is the lexicographer, this the chemist, this made a grammar of
      the old cartouches,	      the old cartouches,	      the old cartouches,	      the old cartouches,
  These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas.	  These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas.	  These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas.	  These mariners put the ship through dangerous unknown seas.
  This is the geologist, this works with the scalper, and this is a	  This is the geologist, this works with the scalper, and this is a	  This is the geologist, this works with the scalper, and this is a	  This is the geologist, this works with the scalper, and this is a
      mathematician.	      mathematician.	      mathematician.	      mathematician.
			
  Gentlemen, to you the first honors always!	  Gentlemen, to you the first honors always!	  Gentlemen, to you the first honors always!	  Gentlemen, to you the first honors always!
  Your facts are useful, and yet they are not my dwelling,	  Your facts are useful, and yet they are not my dwelling,	  Your facts are useful, and yet they are not my dwelling,	  Your facts are useful, and yet they are not my dwelling,
  I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.	  I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.	  I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.	  I but enter by them to an area of my dwelling.
			
  Less the reminders of properties told my words,	  Less the reminders of properties told my words,	  Less the reminders of properties told my words,	  Less the reminders of properties told my words,
  And more the reminders they of life untold, and of freedom and extrication,	  And more the reminders they of life untold, and of freedom and extrication,	  And more the reminders they of life untold, and of freedom and extrication,	  And more the reminders they of life untold, and of freedom and extrication,
  And make short account of neuters and geldings, and favor men and	  And make short account of neuters and geldings, and favor men and	  And make short account of neuters and geldings, and favor men and	  And make short account of neuters and geldings, and favor men and
      women fully equipt,	      women fully equipt,	      women fully equipt,	      women fully equipt,
  And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives and them that	  And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives and them that	  And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives and them that	  And beat the gong of revolt, and stop with fugitives and them that
      plot and conspire.	      plot and conspire.	      plot and conspire.	      plot and conspire.
			
       24	       24	       24	       24
  Walt Whitman, a kosmos, of Manhattan the son,	  Walt Whitman, a kosmos, of Manhattan the son,	  Walt Whitman, a kosmos, of Manhattan the son,	  Walt Whitman, a kosmos, of Manhattan the son,
  Turbulent, fleshy, sensual, eating, drinking and breeding,	  Turbulent, fleshy, sensual, eating, drinking and breeding,	  Turbulent, fleshy, sensual, eating, drinking and breeding,	  Turbulent, fleshy, sensual, eating, drinking and breeding,
  No sentimentalist, no stander above men and women or apart from them,	  No sentimentalist, no stander above men and women or apart from them,	  No sentimentalist, no stander above men and women or apart from them,	  No sentimentalist, no stander above men and women or apart from them,
  No more modest than immodest.	  No more modest than immodest.	  No more modest than immodest.	  No more modest than immodest.
			
  Unscrew the locks from the doors!	  Unscrew the locks from the doors!	  Unscrew the locks from the doors!	  Unscrew the locks from the doors!
  Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs!	  Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs!	  Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs!	  Unscrew the doors themselves from their jambs!
			
  Whoever degrades another degrades me,	  Whoever degrades another degrades me,	  Whoever degrades another degrades me,	  Whoever degrades another degrades me,
  And whatever is done or said returns at last to me.	  And whatever is done or said returns at last to me.	  And whatever is done or said returns at last to me.	  And whatever is done or said returns at last to me.
			
  Through me the afflatus surging and surging, through me the current	  Through me the afflatus surging and surging, through me the current	  Through me the afflatus surging and surging, through me the current	  Through me the afflatus surging and surging, through me the current
      and index.	      and index.	      and index.	      and index.
			
  I speak the pass-word primeval, I give the sign of democracy,	  I speak the pass-word primeval, I give the sign of democracy,	  I speak the pass-word primeval, I give the sign of democracy,	  I speak the pass-word primeval, I give the sign of democracy,
  By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have their	  By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have their	  By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have their	  By God! I will accept nothing which all cannot have their
      counterpart of on the same terms.	      counterpart of on the same terms.	      counterpart of on the same terms.	      counterpart of on the same terms.
			
  Through me many long dumb voices,	  Through me many long dumb voices,	  Through me many long dumb voices,	  Through me many long dumb voices,
  Voices of the interminable generations of prisoners and slaves,	  Voices of the interminable generations of prisoners and slaves,	  Voices of the interminable generations of prisoners and slaves,	  Voices of the interminable generations of prisoners and slaves,
  Voices of the diseas'd and despairing and of thieves and dwarfs,	  Voices of the diseas'd and despairing and of thieves and dwarfs,	  Voices of the diseas'd and despairing and of thieves and dwarfs,	  Voices of the diseas'd and despairing and of thieves and dwarfs,
  Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion,	  Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion,	  Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion,	  Voices of cycles of preparation and accretion,
  And of the threads that connect the stars, and of wombs and of the	  And of the threads that connect the stars, and of wombs and of the	  And of the threads that connect the stars, and of wombs and of the	  And of the threads that connect the stars, and of wombs and of the
      father-stuff,	      father-stuff,	      father-stuff,	      father-stuff,
  And of the rights of them the others are down upon,	  And of the rights of them the others are down upon,	  And of the rights of them the others are down upon,	  And of the rights of them the others are down upon,
  Of the deform'd, trivial, flat, foolish, despised,	  Of the deform'd, trivial, flat, foolish, despised,	  Of the deform'd, trivial, flat, foolish, despised,	  Of the deform'd, trivial, flat, foolish, despised,
  Fog in the air, beetles rolling balls of dung.	  Fog in the air, beetles rolling balls of dung.	  Fog in the air, beetles rolling balls of dung.	  Fog in the air, beetles rolling balls of dung.
			
  Through me forbidden voices,	  Through me forbidden voices,	  Through me forbidden voices,	  Through me forbidden voices,
  Voices of sexes and lusts, voices veil'd and I remove the veil,	  Voices of sexes and lusts, voices veil'd and I remove the veil,	  Voices of sexes and lusts, voices veil'd and I remove the veil,	  Voices of sexes and lusts, voices veil'd and I remove the veil,
  Voices indecent by me clarified and transfigur'd.	  Voices indecent by me clarified and transfigur'd.	  Voices indecent by me clarified and transfigur'd.	  Voices indecent by me clarified and transfigur'd.
			
  I do not press my fingers across my mouth,	  I do not press my fingers across my mouth,	  I do not press my fingers across my mouth,	  I do not press my fingers across my mouth,
  I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the head and heart,	  I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the head and heart,	  I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the head and heart,	  I keep as delicate around the bowels as around the head and heart,
  Copulation is no more rank to me than death is.	  Copulation is no more rank to me than death is.	  Copulation is no more rank to me than death is.	  Copulation is no more rank to me than death is.
			
  I believe in the flesh and the appetites,	  I believe in the flesh and the appetites,	  I believe in the flesh and the appetites,	  I believe in the flesh and the appetites,
  Seeing, hearing, feeling, are miracles, and each part and tag of me	  Seeing, hearing, feeling, are miracles, and each part and tag of me	  Seeing, hearing, feeling, are miracles, and each part and tag of me	  Seeing, hearing, feeling, are miracles, and each part and tag of me
      is a miracle.	      is a miracle.	      is a miracle.	      is a miracle.
			
  Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am	  Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am	  Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am	  Divine am I inside and out, and I make holy whatever I touch or am
      touch'd from,	      touch'd from,	      touch'd from,	      touch'd from,
  The scent of these arm-pits aroma finer than prayer,	  The scent of these arm-pits aroma finer than prayer,	  The scent of these arm-pits aroma finer than prayer,	  The scent of these arm-pits aroma finer than prayer,
  This head more than churches, bibles, and all the creeds.	  This head more than churches, bibles, and all the creeds.	  This head more than churches, bibles, and all the creeds.	  This head more than churches, bibles, and all the creeds.
			
  If I worship one thing more than another it shall be the spread of	  If I worship one thing more than another it shall be the spread of	  If I worship one thing more than another it shall be the spread of	  If I worship one thing more than another it shall be the spread of
      my own body, or any part of it,	      my own body, or any part of it,	      my own body, or any part of it,	      my own body, or any part of it,
  Translucent mould of me it shall be you!	  Translucent mould of me it shall be you!	  Translucent mould of me it shall be you!	  Translucent mould of me it shall be you!
  Shaded ledges and rests it shall be you!	  Shaded ledges and rests it shall be you!	  Shaded ledges and rests it shall be you!	  Shaded ledges and rests it shall be you!
  Firm masculine colter it shall be you!	  Firm masculine colter it shall be you!	  Firm masculine colter it shall be you!	  Firm masculine colter it shall be you!
  Whatever goes to the tilth of me it shall be you!	  Whatever goes to the tilth of me it shall be you!	  Whatever goes to the tilth of me it shall be you!	  Whatever goes to the tilth of me it shall be you!
  You my rich blood! your milky stream pale strippings of my life!	  You my rich blood! your milky stream pale strippings of my life!	  You my rich blood! your milky stream pale strippings of my life!	  You my rich blood! your milky stream pale strippings of my life!
  Breast that presses against other breasts it shall be you!	  Breast that presses against other breasts it shall be you!	  Breast that presses against other breasts it shall be you!	  Breast that presses against other breasts it shall be you!
  My brain it shall be your occult convolutions!	  My brain it shall be your occult convolutions!	  My brain it shall be your occult convolutions!	  My brain it shall be your occult convolutions!
  Root of wash'd sweet-flag! timorous pond-snipe! nest of guarded	  Root of wash'd sweet-flag! timorous pond-snipe! nest of guarded	  Root of wash'd sweet-flag! timorous pond-snipe! nest of guarded	  Root of wash'd sweet-flag! timorous pond-snipe! nest of guarded
      duplicate eggs! it shall be you!	      duplicate eggs! it shall be you!	      duplicate eggs! it shall be you!	      duplicate eggs! it shall be you!
  Mix'd tussled hay of head, beard, brawn, it shall be you!	  Mix'd tussled hay of head, beard, brawn, it shall be you!	  Mix'd tussled hay of head, beard, brawn, it shall be you!	  Mix'd tussled hay of head, beard, brawn, it shall be you!
  Trickling sap of maple, fibre of manly wheat, it shall be you!	  Trickling sap of maple, fibre of manly wheat, it shall be you!	  Trickling sap of maple, fibre of manly wheat, it shall be you!	  Trickling sap of maple, fibre of manly wheat, it shall be you!
  Sun so generous it shall be you!	  Sun so generous it shall be you!	  Sun so generous it shall be you!	  Sun so generous it shall be you!
  Vapors lighting and shading my face it shall be you!	  Vapors lighting and shading my face it shall be you!	  Vapors lighting and shading my face it shall be you!	  Vapors lighting and shading my face it shall be you!
  You sweaty brooks and dews it shall be you!	  You sweaty brooks and dews it shall be you!	  You sweaty brooks and dews it shall be you!	  You sweaty brooks and dews it shall be you!
  Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me it shall be you!	  Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me it shall be you!	  Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me it shall be you!	  Winds whose soft-tickling genitals rub against me it shall be you!
  Broad muscular fields, branches of live oak, loving lounger in my	  Broad muscular fields, branches of live oak, loving lounger in my	  Broad muscular fields, branches of live oak, loving lounger in my	  Broad muscular fields, branches of live oak, loving lounger in my
      winding paths, it shall be you!	      winding paths, it shall be you!	      winding paths, it shall be you!	      winding paths, it shall be you!
  Hands I have taken, face I have kiss'd, mortal I have ever touch'd,	  Hands I have taken, face I have kiss'd, mortal I have ever touch'd,	  Hands I have taken, face I have kiss'd, mortal I have ever touch'd,	  Hands I have taken, face I have kiss'd, mortal I have ever touch'd,
      it shall be you.	      it shall be you.	      it shall be you.	      it shall be you.
			
  I dote on myself, there is that lot of me and all so luscious,	  I dote on myself, there is that lot of me and all so luscious,	  I dote on myself, there is that lot of me and all so luscious,	  I dote on myself, there is that lot of me and all so luscious,
  Each moment and whatever happens thrills me with joy,	  Each moment and whatever happens thrills me with joy,	  Each moment and whatever happens thrills me with joy,	  Each moment and whatever happens thrills me with joy,
  I cannot tell how my ankles bend, nor whence the cause of my faintest wish,	  I cannot tell how my ankles bend, nor whence the cause of my faintest wish,	  I cannot tell how my ankles bend, nor whence the cause of my faintest wish,	  I cannot tell how my ankles bend, nor whence the cause of my faintest wish,
  Nor the cause of the friendship I emit, nor the cause of the	  Nor the cause of the friendship I emit, nor the cause of the	  Nor the cause of the friendship I emit, nor the cause of the	  Nor the cause of the friendship I emit, nor the cause of the
      friendship I take again.	      friendship I take again.	      friendship I take again.	      friendship I take again.
			
  That I walk up my stoop, I pause to consider if it really be,	  That I walk up my stoop, I pause to consider if it really be,	  That I walk up my stoop, I pause to consider if it really be,	  That I walk up my stoop, I pause to consider if it really be,
  A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics	  A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics	  A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics	  A morning-glory at my window satisfies me more than the metaphysics
      of books.	      of books.	      of books.	      of books.
			
  To behold the day-break!	  To behold the day-break!	  To behold the day-break!	  To behold the day-break!
  The little light fades the immense and diaphanous shadows,	  The little light fades the immense and diaphanous shadows,	  The little light fades the immense and diaphanous shadows,	  The little light fades the immense and diaphanous shadows,
  The air tastes good to my palate.	  The air tastes good to my palate.	  The air tastes good to my palate.	  The air tastes good to my palate.
			
  Hefts of the moving world at innocent gambols silently rising	  Hefts of the moving world at innocent gambols silently rising	  Hefts of the moving world at innocent gambols silently rising	  Hefts of the moving world at innocent gambols silently rising
      freshly exuding,	      freshly exuding,	      freshly exuding,	      freshly exuding,
  Scooting obliquely high and low.	  Scooting obliquely high and low.	  Scooting obliquely high and low.	  Scooting obliquely high and low.
			
  Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous prongs,	  Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous prongs,	  Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous prongs,	  Something I cannot see puts upward libidinous prongs,
  Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven.	  Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven.	  Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven.	  Seas of bright juice suffuse heaven.
			
  The earth by the sky staid with, the daily close of their junction,	  The earth by the sky staid with, the daily close of their junction,	  The earth by the sky staid with, the daily close of their junction,	  The earth by the sky staid with, the daily close of their junction,
  The heav'd challenge from the east that moment over my head,	  The heav'd challenge from the east that moment over my head,	  The heav'd challenge from the east that moment over my head,	  The heav'd challenge from the east that moment over my head,
  The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be master!	  The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be master!	  The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be master!	  The mocking taunt, See then whether you shall be master!
			
       25	       25	       25	       25
  Dazzling and tremendous how quick the sun-rise would kill me,	  Dazzling and tremendous how quick the sun-rise would kill me,	  Dazzling and tremendous how quick the sun-rise would kill me,	  Dazzling and tremendous how quick the sun-rise would kill me,
  If I could not now and always send sun-rise out of me.	  If I could not now and always send sun-rise out of me.	  If I could not now and always send sun-rise out of me.	  If I could not now and always send sun-rise out of me.
			
  We also ascend dazzling and tremendous as the sun,	  We also ascend dazzling and tremendous as the sun,	  We also ascend dazzling and tremendous as the sun,	  We also ascend dazzling and tremendous as the sun,
  We found our own O my soul in the calm and cool of the daybreak.	  We found our own O my soul in the calm and cool of the daybreak.	  We found our own O my soul in the calm and cool of the daybreak.	  We found our own O my soul in the calm and cool of the daybreak.
			
  My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach,	  My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach,	  My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach,	  My voice goes after what my eyes cannot reach,
  With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds and volumes of worlds.	  With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds and volumes of worlds.	  With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds and volumes of worlds.	  With the twirl of my tongue I encompass worlds and volumes of worlds.
			
  Speech is the twin of my vision, it is unequal to measure itself,	  Speech is the twin of my vision, it is unequal to measure itself,	  Speech is the twin of my vision, it is unequal to measure itself,	  Speech is the twin of my vision, it is unequal to measure itself,
  It provokes me forever, it says sarcastically,	  It provokes me forever, it says sarcastically,	  It provokes me forever, it says sarcastically,	  It provokes me forever, it says sarcastically,
  Walt you contain enough, why don't you let it out then?	  Walt you contain enough, why don't you let it out then?	  Walt you contain enough, why don't you let it out then?	  Walt you contain enough, why don't you let it out then?
			
  Come now I will not be tantalized, you conceive too much of	  Come now I will not be tantalized, you conceive too much of	  Come now I will not be tantalized, you conceive too much of	  Come now I will not be tantalized, you conceive too much of
      articulation,	      articulation,	      articulation,	      articulation,
  Do you not know O speech how the buds beneath you are folded?	  Do you not know O speech how the buds beneath you are folded?	  Do you not know O speech how the buds beneath you are folded?	  Do you not know O speech how the buds beneath you are folded?
  Waiting in gloom, protected by frost,	  Waiting in gloom, protected by frost,	  Waiting in gloom, protected by frost,	  Waiting in gloom, protected by frost,
  The dirt receding before my prophetical screams,	  The dirt receding before my prophetical screams,	  The dirt receding before my prophetical screams,	  The dirt receding before my prophetical screams,
  I underlying causes to balance them at last,	  I underlying causes to balance them at last,	  I underlying causes to balance them at last,	  I underlying causes to balance them at last,
  My knowledge my live parts, it keeping tally with the meaning of all things,	  My knowledge my live parts, it keeping tally with the meaning of all things,	  My knowledge my live parts, it keeping tally with the meaning of all things,	  My knowledge my live parts, it keeping tally with the meaning of all things,
  Happiness, (which whoever hears me let him or her set out in search	  Happiness, (which whoever hears me let him or her set out in search	  Happiness, (which whoever hears me let him or her set out in search	  Happiness, (which whoever hears me let him or her set out in search
      of this day.)	      of this day.)	      of this day.)	      of this day.)
			
  My final merit I refuse you, I refuse putting from me what I really am,	  My final merit I refuse you, I refuse putting from me what I really am,	  My final merit I refuse you, I refuse putting from me what I really am,	  My final merit I refuse you, I refuse putting from me what I really am,
  Encompass worlds, but never try to encompass me,	  Encompass worlds, but never try to encompass me,	  Encompass worlds, but never try to encompass me,	  Encompass worlds, but never try to encompass me,
  I crowd your sleekest and best by simply looking toward you.	  I crowd your sleekest and best by simply looking toward you.	  I crowd your sleekest and best by simply looking toward you.	  I crowd your sleekest and best by simply looking toward you.
			
  Writing and talk do not prove me,	  Writing and talk do not prove me,	  Writing and talk do not prove me,	  Writing and talk do not prove me,
  I carry the plenum of proof and every thing else in my face,	  I carry the plenum of proof and every thing else in my face,	  I carry the plenum of proof and every thing else in my face,	  I carry the plenum of proof and every thing else in my face,
  With the hush of my lips I wholly confound the skeptic.	  With the hush of my lips I wholly confound the skeptic.	  With the hush of my lips I wholly confound the skeptic.	  With the hush of my lips I wholly confound the skeptic.
			
       26	       26	       26	       26
  Now I will do nothing but listen,	  Now I will do nothing but listen,	  Now I will do nothing but listen,	  Now I will do nothing but listen,
  To accrue what I hear into this song, to let sounds contribute toward it.	  To accrue what I hear into this song, to let sounds contribute toward it.	  To accrue what I hear into this song, to let sounds contribute toward it.	  To accrue what I hear into this song, to let sounds contribute toward it.
			
  I hear bravuras of birds, bustle of growing wheat, gossip of flames,	  I hear bravuras of birds, bustle of growing wheat, gossip of flames,	  I hear bravuras of birds, bustle of growing wheat, gossip of flames,	  I hear bravuras of birds, bustle of growing wheat, gossip of flames,
      clack of sticks cooking my meals,	      clack of sticks cooking my meals,	      clack of sticks cooking my meals,	      clack of sticks cooking my meals,
  I hear the sound I love, the sound of the human voice,	  I hear the sound I love, the sound of the human voice,	  I hear the sound I love, the sound of the human voice,	  I hear the sound I love, the sound of the human voice,
  I hear all sounds running together, combined, fused or following,	  I hear all sounds running together, combined, fused or following,	  I hear all sounds running together, combined, fused or following,	  I hear all sounds running together, combined, fused or following,
  Sounds of the city and sounds out of the city, sounds of the day and night,	  Sounds of the city and sounds out of the city, sounds of the day and night,	  Sounds of the city and sounds out of the city, sounds of the day and night,	  Sounds of the city and sounds out of the city, sounds of the day and night,
  Talkative young ones to those that like them, the loud laugh of	  Talkative young ones to those that like them, the loud laugh of	  Talkative young ones to those that like them, the loud laugh of	  Talkative young ones to those that like them, the loud laugh of
      work-people at their meals,	      work-people at their meals,	      work-people at their meals,	      work-people at their meals,
  The angry base of disjointed friendship, the faint tones of the sick,	  The angry base of disjointed friendship, the faint tones of the sick,	  The angry base of disjointed friendship, the faint tones of the sick,	  The angry base of disjointed friendship, the faint tones of the sick,
  The judge with hands tight to the desk, his pallid lips pronouncing	  The judge with hands tight to the desk, his pallid lips pronouncing	  The judge with hands tight to the desk, his pallid lips pronouncing	  The judge with hands tight to the desk, his pallid lips pronouncing
      a death-sentence,	      a death-sentence,	      a death-sentence,	      a death-sentence,
  The heave'e'yo of stevedores unlading ships by the wharves, the	  The heave'e'yo of stevedores unlading ships by the wharves, the	  The heave'e'yo of stevedores unlading ships by the wharves, the	  The heave'e'yo of stevedores unlading ships by the wharves, the
      refrain of the anchor-lifters,	      refrain of the anchor-lifters,	      refrain of the anchor-lifters,	      refrain of the anchor-lifters,
  The ring of alarm-bells, the cry of fire, the whirr of swift-streaking	  The ring of alarm-bells, the cry of fire, the whirr of swift-streaking	  The ring of alarm-bells, the cry of fire, the whirr of swift-streaking	  The ring of alarm-bells, the cry of fire, the whirr of swift-streaking
      engines and hose-carts with premonitory tinkles and color'd lights,	      engines and hose-carts with premonitory tinkles and color'd lights,	      engines and hose-carts with premonitory tinkles and color'd lights,	      engines and hose-carts with premonitory tinkles and color'd lights,
  The steam-whistle, the solid roll of the train of approaching cars,	  The steam-whistle, the solid roll of the train of approaching cars,	  The steam-whistle, the solid roll of the train of approaching cars,	  The steam-whistle, the solid roll of the train of approaching cars,
  The slow march play'd at the head of the association marching two and two,	  The slow march play'd at the head of the association marching two and two,	  The slow march play'd at the head of the association marching two and two,	  The slow march play'd at the head of the association marching two and two,
  (They go to guard some corpse, the flag-tops are draped with black muslin.)	  (They go to guard some corpse, the flag-tops are draped with black muslin.)	  (They go to guard some corpse, the flag-tops are draped with black muslin.)	  (They go to guard some corpse, the flag-tops are draped with black muslin.)
			
  I hear the violoncello, ('tis the young man's heart's complaint,)	  I hear the violoncello, ('tis the young man's heart's complaint,)	  I hear the violoncello, ('tis the young man's heart's complaint,)	  I hear the violoncello, ('tis the young man's heart's complaint,)
  I hear the key'd cornet, it glides quickly in through my ears,	  I hear the key'd cornet, it glides quickly in through my ears,	  I hear the key'd cornet, it glides quickly in through my ears,	  I hear the key'd cornet, it glides quickly in through my ears,
  It shakes mad-sweet pangs through my belly and breast.	  It shakes mad-sweet pangs through my belly and breast.	  It shakes mad-sweet pangs through my belly and breast.	  It shakes mad-sweet pangs through my belly and breast.
			
  I hear the chorus, it is a grand opera,	  I hear the chorus, it is a grand opera,	  I hear the chorus, it is a grand opera,	  I hear the chorus, it is a grand opera,
  Ah this indeed is music--this suits me.	  Ah this indeed is music--this suits me.	  Ah this indeed is music--this suits me.	  Ah this indeed is music--this suits me.
			
  A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me,	  A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me,	  A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me,	  A tenor large and fresh as the creation fills me,
  The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me full.	  The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me full.	  The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me full.	  The orbic flex of his mouth is pouring and filling me full.
			
  I hear the train'd soprano (what work with hers is this?)	  I hear the train'd soprano (what work with hers is this?)	  I hear the train'd soprano (what work with hers is this?)	  I hear the train'd soprano (what work with hers is this?)
  The orchestra whirls me wider than Uranus flies,	  The orchestra whirls me wider than Uranus flies,	  The orchestra whirls me wider than Uranus flies,	  The orchestra whirls me wider than Uranus flies,
  It wrenches such ardors from me I did not know I possess'd them,	  It wrenches such ardors from me I did not know I possess'd them,	  It wrenches such ardors from me I did not know I possess'd them,	  It wrenches such ardors from me I did not know I possess'd them,
  It sails me, I dab with bare feet, they are lick'd by the indolent waves,	  It sails me, I dab with bare feet, they are lick'd by the indolent waves,	  It sails me, I dab with bare feet, they are lick'd by the indolent waves,	  It sails me, I dab with bare feet, they are lick'd by the indolent waves,
  I am cut by bitter and angry hail, I lose my breath,	  I am cut by bitter and angry hail, I lose my breath,	  I am cut by bitter and angry hail, I lose my breath,	  I am cut by bitter and angry hail, I lose my breath,
  Steep'd amid honey'd morphine, my windpipe throttled in fakes of death,	  Steep'd amid honey'd morphine, my windpipe throttled in fakes of death,	  Steep'd amid honey'd morphine, my windpipe throttled in fakes of death,	  Steep'd amid honey'd morphine, my windpipe throttled in fakes of death,
  At length let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles,	  At length let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles,	  At length let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles,	  At length let up again to feel the puzzle of puzzles,
  And that we call Being.	  And that we call Being.	  And that we call Being.	  And that we call Being.
			
       27	       27	       27	       27
  To be in any form, what is that?	  To be in any form, what is that?	  To be in any form, what is that?	  To be in any form, what is that?
  (Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither,)	  (Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither,)	  (Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither,)	  (Round and round we go, all of us, and ever come back thither,)
  If nothing lay more develop'd the quahaug in its callous shell were enough.	  If nothing lay more develop'd the quahaug in its callous shell were enough.	  If nothing lay more develop'd the quahaug in its callous shell were enough.	  If nothing lay more develop'd the quahaug in its callous shell were enough.
			
  Mine is no callous shell,	  Mine is no callous shell,	  Mine is no callous shell,	  Mine is no callous shell,
  I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop,	  I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop,	  I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop,	  I have instant conductors all over me whether I pass or stop,
  They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.	  They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.	  They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.	  They seize every object and lead it harmlessly through me.
			
  I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,	  I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,	  I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,	  I merely stir, press, feel with my fingers, and am happy,
  To touch my person to some one else's is about as much as I can stand.	  To touch my person to some one else's is about as much as I can stand.	  To touch my person to some one else's is about as much as I can stand.	  To touch my person to some one else's is about as much as I can stand.
			
       28	       28	       28	       28
  Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity,	  Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity,	  Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity,	  Is this then a touch? quivering me to a new identity,
  Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,	  Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,	  Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,	  Flames and ether making a rush for my veins,
  Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,	  Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,	  Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,	  Treacherous tip of me reaching and crowding to help them,
  My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly	  My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly	  My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly	  My flesh and blood playing out lightning to strike what is hardly
      different from myself,	      different from myself,	      different from myself,	      different from myself,
  On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,	  On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,	  On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,	  On all sides prurient provokers stiffening my limbs,
  Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,	  Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,	  Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,	  Straining the udder of my heart for its withheld drip,
  Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,	  Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,	  Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,	  Behaving licentious toward me, taking no denial,
  Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,	  Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,	  Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,	  Depriving me of my best as for a purpose,
  Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist,	  Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist,	  Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist,	  Unbuttoning my clothes, holding me by the bare waist,
  Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields,	  Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields,	  Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields,	  Deluding my confusion with the calm of the sunlight and pasture-fields,
  Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,	  Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,	  Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,	  Immodestly sliding the fellow-senses away,
  They bribed to swap off with touch and go and graze at the edges of me,	  They bribed to swap off with touch and go and graze at the edges of me,	  They bribed to swap off with touch and go and graze at the edges of me,	  They bribed to swap off with touch and go and graze at the edges of me,
  No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger,	  No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger,	  No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger,	  No consideration, no regard for my draining strength or my anger,
  Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while,	  Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while,	  Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while,	  Fetching the rest of the herd around to enjoy them a while,
  Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.	  Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.	  Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.	  Then all uniting to stand on a headland and worry me.
			
  The sentries desert every other part of me,	  The sentries desert every other part of me,	  The sentries desert every other part of me,	  The sentries desert every other part of me,
  They have left me helpless to a red marauder,	  They have left me helpless to a red marauder,	  They have left me helpless to a red marauder,	  They have left me helpless to a red marauder,
  They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.	  They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.	  They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.	  They all come to the headland to witness and assist against me.
			
  I am given up by traitors,	  I am given up by traitors,	  I am given up by traitors,	  I am given up by traitors,
  I talk wildly, I have lost my wits, I and nobody else am the	  I talk wildly, I have lost my wits, I and nobody else am the	  I talk wildly, I have lost my wits, I and nobody else am the	  I talk wildly, I have lost my wits, I and nobody else am the
      greatest traitor,	      greatest traitor,	      greatest traitor,	      greatest traitor,
  I went myself first to the headland, my own hands carried me there.	  I went myself first to the headland, my own hands carried me there.	  I went myself first to the headland, my own hands carried me there.	  I went myself first to the headland, my own hands carried me there.
			
  You villain touch! what are you doing? my breath is tight in its throat,	  You villain touch! what are you doing? my breath is tight in its throat,	  You villain touch! what are you doing? my breath is tight in its throat,	  You villain touch! what are you doing? my breath is tight in its throat,
  Unclench your floodgates, you are too much for me.	  Unclench your floodgates, you are too much for me.	  Unclench your floodgates, you are too much for me.	  Unclench your floodgates, you are too much for me.
			
       29	       29	       29	       29
  Blind loving wrestling touch, sheath'd hooded sharp-tooth'd touch!	  Blind loving wrestling touch, sheath'd hooded sharp-tooth'd touch!	  Blind loving wrestling touch, sheath'd hooded sharp-tooth'd touch!	  Blind loving wrestling touch, sheath'd hooded sharp-tooth'd touch!
  Did it make you ache so, leaving me?	  Did it make you ache so, leaving me?	  Did it make you ache so, leaving me?	  Did it make you ache so, leaving me?
			
  Parting track'd by arriving, perpetual payment of perpetual loan,	  Parting track'd by arriving, perpetual payment of perpetual loan,	  Parting track'd by arriving, perpetual payment of perpetual loan,	  Parting track'd by arriving, perpetual payment of perpetual loan,
  Rich showering rain, and recompense richer afterward.	  Rich showering rain, and recompense richer afterward.	  Rich showering rain, and recompense richer afterward.	  Rich showering rain, and recompense richer afterward.
			
  Sprouts take and accumulate, stand by the curb prolific and vital,	  Sprouts take and accumulate, stand by the curb prolific and vital,	  Sprouts take and accumulate, stand by the curb prolific and vital,	  Sprouts take and accumulate, stand by the curb prolific and vital,
  Landscapes projected masculine, full-sized and golden.	  Landscapes projected masculine, full-sized and golden.	  Landscapes projected masculine, full-sized and golden.	  Landscapes projected masculine, full-sized and golden.
			
       30	       30	       30	       30
  All truths wait in all things,	  All truths wait in all things,	  All truths wait in all things,	  All truths wait in all things,
  They neither hasten their own delivery nor resist it,	  They neither hasten their own delivery nor resist it,	  They neither hasten their own delivery nor resist it,	  They neither hasten their own delivery nor resist it,
  They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon,	  They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon,	  They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon,	  They do not need the obstetric forceps of the surgeon,
  The insignificant is as big to me as any,	  The insignificant is as big to me as any,	  The insignificant is as big to me as any,	  The insignificant is as big to me as any,
  (What is less or more than a touch?)	  (What is less or more than a touch?)	  (What is less or more than a touch?)	  (What is less or more than a touch?)
			
  Logic and sermons never convince,	  Logic and sermons never convince,	  Logic and sermons never convince,	  Logic and sermons never convince,
  The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul.	  The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul.	  The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul.	  The damp of the night drives deeper into my soul.
			
  (Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so,	  (Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so,	  (Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so,	  (Only what proves itself to every man and woman is so,
  Only what nobody denies is so.)	  Only what nobody denies is so.)	  Only what nobody denies is so.)	  Only what nobody denies is so.)
			
  A minute and a drop of me settle my brain,	  A minute and a drop of me settle my brain,	  A minute and a drop of me settle my brain,	  A minute and a drop of me settle my brain,
  I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and lamps,	  I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and lamps,	  I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and lamps,	  I believe the soggy clods shall become lovers and lamps,
  And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or woman,	  And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or woman,	  And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or woman,	  And a compend of compends is the meat of a man or woman,
  And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have for each other,	  And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have for each other,	  And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have for each other,	  And a summit and flower there is the feeling they have for each other,
  And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson until it	  And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson until it	  And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson until it	  And they are to branch boundlessly out of that lesson until it
      becomes omnific,	      becomes omnific,	      becomes omnific,	      becomes omnific,
  And until one and all shall delight us, and we them.	  And until one and all shall delight us, and we them.	  And until one and all shall delight us, and we them.	  And until one and all shall delight us, and we them.
			
       31	       31	       31	       31
  I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey work of the stars,	  I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey work of the stars,	  I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey work of the stars,	  I believe a leaf of grass is no less than the journey work of the stars,
  And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg	  And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg	  And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg	  And the pismire is equally perfect, and a grain of sand, and the egg
      of the wren,	      of the wren,	      of the wren,	      of the wren,
  And the tree-toad is a chef-d'oeuvre for the highest,	  And the tree-toad is a chef-d'oeuvre for the highest,	  And the tree-toad is a chef-d'oeuvre for the highest,	  And the tree-toad is a chef-d'oeuvre for the highest,
  And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven,	  And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven,	  And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven,	  And the running blackberry would adorn the parlors of heaven,
  And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery,	  And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery,	  And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery,	  And the narrowest hinge in my hand puts to scorn all machinery,
  And the cow crunching with depress'd head surpasses any statue,	  And the cow crunching with depress'd head surpasses any statue,	  And the cow crunching with depress'd head surpasses any statue,	  And the cow crunching with depress'd head surpasses any statue,
  And a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels.	  And a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels.	  And a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels.	  And a mouse is miracle enough to stagger sextillions of infidels.
			
  I find I incorporate gneiss, coal, long-threaded moss, fruits,	  I find I incorporate gneiss, coal, long-threaded moss, fruits,	  I find I incorporate gneiss, coal, long-threaded moss, fruits,	  I find I incorporate gneiss, coal, long-threaded moss, fruits,
      grains, esculent roots,	      grains, esculent roots,	      grains, esculent roots,	      grains, esculent roots,
  And am stucco'd with quadrupeds and birds all over,	  And am stucco'd with quadrupeds and birds all over,	  And am stucco'd with quadrupeds and birds all over,	  And am stucco'd with quadrupeds and birds all over,
  And have distanced what is behind me for good reasons,	  And have distanced what is behind me for good reasons,	  And have distanced what is behind me for good reasons,	  And have distanced what is behind me for good reasons,
  But call any thing back again when I desire it.	  But call any thing back again when I desire it.	  But call any thing back again when I desire it.	  But call any thing back again when I desire it.
			
  In vain the speeding or shyness,	  In vain the speeding or shyness,	  In vain the speeding or shyness,	  In vain the speeding or shyness,
  In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against my approach,	  In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against my approach,	  In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against my approach,	  In vain the plutonic rocks send their old heat against my approach,
  In vain the mastodon retreats beneath its own powder'd bones,	  In vain the mastodon retreats beneath its own powder'd bones,	  In vain the mastodon retreats beneath its own powder'd bones,	  In vain the mastodon retreats beneath its own powder'd bones,
  In vain objects stand leagues off and assume manifold shapes,	  In vain objects stand leagues off and assume manifold shapes,	  In vain objects stand leagues off and assume manifold shapes,	  In vain objects stand leagues off and assume manifold shapes,
  In vain the ocean settling in hollows and the great monsters lying low,	  In vain the ocean settling in hollows and the great monsters lying low,	  In vain the ocean settling in hollows and the great monsters lying low,	  In vain the ocean settling in hollows and the great monsters lying low,
  In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky,	  In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky,	  In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky,	  In vain the buzzard houses herself with the sky,
  In vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs,	  In vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs,	  In vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs,	  In vain the snake slides through the creepers and logs,
  In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods,	  In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods,	  In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods,	  In vain the elk takes to the inner passes of the woods,
  In vain the razor-bill'd auk sails far north to Labrador,	  In vain the razor-bill'd auk sails far north to Labrador,	  In vain the razor-bill'd auk sails far north to Labrador,	  In vain the razor-bill'd auk sails far north to Labrador,
  I follow quickly, I ascend to the nest in the fissure of the cliff.	  I follow quickly, I ascend to the nest in the fissure of the cliff.	  I follow quickly, I ascend to the nest in the fissure of the cliff.	  I follow quickly, I ascend to the nest in the fissure of the cliff.
			
       32	       32	       32	       32
  I think I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and	  I think I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and	  I think I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and	  I think I could turn and live with animals, they are so placid and
      self-contain'd,	      self-contain'd,	      self-contain'd,	      self-contain'd,
  I stand and look at them long and long.	  I stand and look at them long and long.	  I stand and look at them long and long.	  I stand and look at them long and long.
			
  They do not sweat and whine about their condition,	  They do not sweat and whine about their condition,	  They do not sweat and whine about their condition,	  They do not sweat and whine about their condition,
  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,	  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,	  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,	  They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins,
  They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,	  They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,	  They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,	  They do not make me sick discussing their duty to God,
  Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of	  Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of	  Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of	  Not one is dissatisfied, not one is demented with the mania of
      owning things,	      owning things,	      owning things,	      owning things,
  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of	  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of	  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of	  Not one kneels to another, nor to his kind that lived thousands of
      years ago,	      years ago,	      years ago,	      years ago,
  Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.	  Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.	  Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.	  Not one is respectable or unhappy over the whole earth.
			
  So they show their relations to me and I accept them,	  So they show their relations to me and I accept them,	  So they show their relations to me and I accept them,	  So they show their relations to me and I accept them,
  They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their	  They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their	  They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their	  They bring me tokens of myself, they evince them plainly in their
      possession.	      possession.	      possession.	      possession.
			
  I wonder where they get those tokens,	  I wonder where they get those tokens,	  I wonder where they get those tokens,	  I wonder where they get those tokens,
  Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?	  Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?	  Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?	  Did I pass that way huge times ago and negligently drop them?
			
  Myself moving forward then and now and forever,	  Myself moving forward then and now and forever,	  Myself moving forward then and now and forever,	  Myself moving forward then and now and forever,
  Gathering and showing more always and with velocity,	  Gathering and showing more always and with velocity,	  Gathering and showing more always and with velocity,	  Gathering and showing more always and with velocity,
  Infinite and omnigenous, and the like of these among them,	  Infinite and omnigenous, and the like of these among them,	  Infinite and omnigenous, and the like of these among them,	  Infinite and omnigenous, and the like of these among them,
  Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remembrancers,	  Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remembrancers,	  Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remembrancers,	  Not too exclusive toward the reachers of my remembrancers,
  Picking out here one that I love, and now go with him on brotherly terms.	  Picking out here one that I love, and now go with him on brotherly terms.	  Picking out here one that I love, and now go with him on brotherly terms.	  Picking out here one that I love, and now go with him on brotherly terms.
			
  A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive to my caresses,	  A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive to my caresses,	  A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive to my caresses,	  A gigantic beauty of a stallion, fresh and responsive to my caresses,
  Head high in the forehead, wide between the ears,	  Head high in the forehead, wide between the ears,	  Head high in the forehead, wide between the ears,	  Head high in the forehead, wide between the ears,
  Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground,	  Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground,	  Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground,	  Limbs glossy and supple, tail dusting the ground,
  Eyes full of sparkling wickedness, ears finely cut, flexibly moving.	  Eyes full of sparkling wickedness, ears finely cut, flexibly moving.	  Eyes full of sparkling wickedness, ears finely cut, flexibly moving.	  Eyes full of sparkling wickedness, ears finely cut, flexibly moving.
			
  His nostrils dilate as my heels embrace him,	  His nostrils dilate as my heels embrace him,	  His nostrils dilate as my heels embrace him,	  His nostrils dilate as my heels embrace him,
  His well-built limbs tremble with pleasure as we race around and return.	  His well-built limbs tremble with pleasure as we race around and return.	  His well-built limbs tremble with pleasure as we race around and return.	  His well-built limbs tremble with pleasure as we race around and return.
			
  I but use you a minute, then I resign you, stallion,	  I but use you a minute, then I resign you, stallion,	  I but use you a minute, then I resign you, stallion,	  I but use you a minute, then I resign you, stallion,
  Why do I need your paces when I myself out-gallop them?	  Why do I need your paces when I myself out-gallop them?	  Why do I need your paces when I myself out-gallop them?	  Why do I need your paces when I myself out-gallop them?
  Even as I stand or sit passing faster than you.	  Even as I stand or sit passing faster than you.	  Even as I stand or sit passing faster than you.	  Even as I stand or sit passing faster than you.
			
       33	       33	       33	       33
  Space and Time! now I see it is true, what I guess'd at,	  Space and Time! now I see it is true, what I guess'd at,	  Space and Time! now I see it is true, what I guess'd at,	  Space and Time! now I see it is true, what I guess'd at,
  What I guess'd when I loaf'd on the grass,	  What I guess'd when I loaf'd on the grass,	  What I guess'd when I loaf'd on the grass,	  What I guess'd when I loaf'd on the grass,
  What I guess'd while I lay alone in my bed,	  What I guess'd while I lay alone in my bed,	  What I guess'd while I lay alone in my bed,	  What I guess'd while I lay alone in my bed,
  And again as I walk'd the beach under the paling stars of the morning.	  And again as I walk'd the beach under the paling stars of the morning.	  And again as I walk'd the beach under the paling stars of the morning.	  And again as I walk'd the beach under the paling stars of the morning.
			
  My ties and ballasts leave me, my elbows rest in sea-gaps,	  My ties and ballasts leave me, my elbows rest in sea-gaps,	  My ties and ballasts leave me, my elbows rest in sea-gaps,	  My ties and ballasts leave me, my elbows rest in sea-gaps,
  I skirt sierras, my palms cover continents,	  I skirt sierras, my palms cover continents,	  I skirt sierras, my palms cover continents,	  I skirt sierras, my palms cover continents,
  I am afoot with my vision.	  I am afoot with my vision.	  I am afoot with my vision.	  I am afoot with my vision.
			
  By the city's quadrangular houses--in log huts, camping with lumber-men,	  By the city's quadrangular houses--in log huts, camping with lumber-men,	  By the city's quadrangular houses--in log huts, camping with lumber-men,	  By the city's quadrangular houses--in log huts, camping with lumber-men,
  Along the ruts of the turnpike, along the dry gulch and rivulet bed,	  Along the ruts of the turnpike, along the dry gulch and rivulet bed,	  Along the ruts of the turnpike, along the dry gulch and rivulet bed,	  Along the ruts of the turnpike, along the dry gulch and rivulet bed,
  Weeding my onion-patch or hosing rows of carrots and parsnips,	  Weeding my onion-patch or hosing rows of carrots and parsnips,	  Weeding my onion-patch or hosing rows of carrots and parsnips,	  Weeding my onion-patch or hosing rows of carrots and parsnips,
      crossing savannas, trailing in forests,	      crossing savannas, trailing in forests,	      crossing savannas, trailing in forests,	      crossing savannas, trailing in forests,
  Prospecting, gold-digging, girdling the trees of a new purchase,	  Prospecting, gold-digging, girdling the trees of a new purchase,	  Prospecting, gold-digging, girdling the trees of a new purchase,	  Prospecting, gold-digging, girdling the trees of a new purchase,
  Scorch'd ankle-deep by the hot sand, hauling my boat down the	  Scorch'd ankle-deep by the hot sand, hauling my boat down the	  Scorch'd ankle-deep by the hot sand, hauling my boat down the	  Scorch'd ankle-deep by the hot sand, hauling my boat down the
      shallow river,	      shallow river,	      shallow river,	      shallow river,
  Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb overhead, where the	  Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb overhead, where the	  Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb overhead, where the	  Where the panther walks to and fro on a limb overhead, where the
      buck turns furiously at the hunter,	      buck turns furiously at the hunter,	      buck turns furiously at the hunter,	      buck turns furiously at the hunter,
  Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock, where the	  Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock, where the	  Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock, where the	  Where the rattlesnake suns his flabby length on a rock, where the
      otter is feeding on fish,	      otter is feeding on fish,	      otter is feeding on fish,	      otter is feeding on fish,
  Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the bayou,	  Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the bayou,	  Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the bayou,	  Where the alligator in his tough pimples sleeps by the bayou,
  Where the black bear is searching for roots or honey, where the	  Where the black bear is searching for roots or honey, where the	  Where the black bear is searching for roots or honey, where the	  Where the black bear is searching for roots or honey, where the
      beaver pats the mud with his paddle-shaped tall;	      beaver pats the mud with his paddle-shaped tall;	      beaver pats the mud with his paddle-shaped tall;	      beaver pats the mud with his paddle-shaped tall;
  Over the growing sugar, over the yellow-flower'd cotton plant, over	  Over the growing sugar, over the yellow-flower'd cotton plant, over	  Over the growing sugar, over the yellow-flower'd cotton plant, over	  Over the growing sugar, over the yellow-flower'd cotton plant, over
      the rice in its low moist field,	      the rice in its low moist field,	      the rice in its low moist field,	      the rice in its low moist field,
  Over the sharp-peak'd farm house, with its scallop'd scum and	  Over the sharp-peak'd farm house, with its scallop'd scum and	  Over the sharp-peak'd farm house, with its scallop'd scum and	  Over the sharp-peak'd farm house, with its scallop'd scum and
      slender shoots from the gutters,	      slender shoots from the gutters,	      slender shoots from the gutters,	      slender shoots from the gutters,
  Over the western persimmon, over the long-leav'd corn, over the	  Over the western persimmon, over the long-leav'd corn, over the	  Over the western persimmon, over the long-leav'd corn, over the	  Over the western persimmon, over the long-leav'd corn, over the
      delicate blue-flower flax,	      delicate blue-flower flax,	      delicate blue-flower flax,	      delicate blue-flower flax,
  Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and buzzer there with	  Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and buzzer there with	  Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and buzzer there with	  Over the white and brown buckwheat, a hummer and buzzer there with
      the rest,	      the rest,	      the rest,	      the rest,
  Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and shades in the breeze;	  Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and shades in the breeze;	  Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and shades in the breeze;	  Over the dusky green of the rye as it ripples and shades in the breeze;
  Scaling mountains, pulling myself cautiously up, holding on by low	  Scaling mountains, pulling myself cautiously up, holding on by low	  Scaling mountains, pulling myself cautiously up, holding on by low	  Scaling mountains, pulling myself cautiously up, holding on by low
      scragged limbs,	      scragged limbs,	      scragged limbs,	      scragged limbs,
  Walking the path worn in the grass and beat through the leaves of the brush,	  Walking the path worn in the grass and beat through the leaves of the brush,	  Walking the path worn in the grass and beat through the leaves of the brush,	  Walking the path worn in the grass and beat through the leaves of the brush,
  Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and the wheat-lot,	  Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and the wheat-lot,	  Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and the wheat-lot,	  Where the quail is whistling betwixt the woods and the wheat-lot,
  Where the bat flies in the Seventh-month eve, where the great	  Where the bat flies in the Seventh-month eve, where the great	  Where the bat flies in the Seventh-month eve, where the great	  Where the bat flies in the Seventh-month eve, where the great
      goldbug drops through the dark,	      goldbug drops through the dark,	      goldbug drops through the dark,	      goldbug drops through the dark,
  Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree and flows to	  Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree and flows to	  Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree and flows to	  Where the brook puts out of the roots of the old tree and flows to
      the meadow,	      the meadow,	      the meadow,	      the meadow,
  Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the tremulous	  Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the tremulous	  Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the tremulous	  Where cattle stand and shake away flies with the tremulous
      shuddering of their hides,	      shuddering of their hides,	      shuddering of their hides,	      shuddering of their hides,
  Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen, where andirons straddle	  Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen, where andirons straddle	  Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen, where andirons straddle	  Where the cheese-cloth hangs in the kitchen, where andirons straddle
      the hearth-slab, where cobwebs fall in festoons from the rafters;	      the hearth-slab, where cobwebs fall in festoons from the rafters;	      the hearth-slab, where cobwebs fall in festoons from the rafters;	      the hearth-slab, where cobwebs fall in festoons from the rafters;
  Where trip-hammers crash, where the press is whirling its cylinders,	  Where trip-hammers crash, where the press is whirling its cylinders,	  Where trip-hammers crash, where the press is whirling its cylinders,	  Where trip-hammers crash, where the press is whirling its cylinders,
  Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes under its ribs,	  Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes under its ribs,	  Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes under its ribs,	  Wherever the human heart beats with terrible throes under its ribs,
  Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft, (floating in it	  Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft, (floating in it	  Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft, (floating in it	  Where the pear-shaped balloon is floating aloft, (floating in it
      myself and looking composedly down,)	      myself and looking composedly down,)	      myself and looking composedly down,)	      myself and looking composedly down,)
  Where the life-car is drawn on the slip-noose, where the heat	  Where the life-car is drawn on the slip-noose, where the heat	  Where the life-car is drawn on the slip-noose, where the heat	  Where the life-car is drawn on the slip-noose, where the heat
      hatches pale-green eggs in the dented sand,	      hatches pale-green eggs in the dented sand,	      hatches pale-green eggs in the dented sand,	      hatches pale-green eggs in the dented sand,
  Where the she-whale swims with her calf and never forsakes it,	  Where the she-whale swims with her calf and never forsakes it,	  Where the she-whale swims with her calf and never forsakes it,	  Where the she-whale swims with her calf and never forsakes it,
  Where the steam-ship trails hind-ways its long pennant of smoke,	  Where the steam-ship trails hind-ways its long pennant of smoke,	  Where the steam-ship trails hind-ways its long pennant of smoke,	  Where the steam-ship trails hind-ways its long pennant of smoke,
  Where the fin of the shark cuts like a black chip out of the water,	  Where the fin of the shark cuts like a black chip out of the water,	  Where the fin of the shark cuts like a black chip out of the water,	  Where the fin of the shark cuts like a black chip out of the water,
  Where the half-burn'd brig is riding on unknown currents,	  Where the half-burn'd brig is riding on unknown currents,	  Where the half-burn'd brig is riding on unknown currents,	  Where the half-burn'd brig is riding on unknown currents,
  Where shells grow to her slimy deck, where the dead are corrupting below;	  Where shells grow to her slimy deck, where the dead are corrupting below;	  Where shells grow to her slimy deck, where the dead are corrupting below;	  Where shells grow to her slimy deck, where the dead are corrupting below;
  Where the dense-starr'd flag is borne at the head of the regiments,	  Where the dense-starr'd flag is borne at the head of the regiments,	  Where the dense-starr'd flag is borne at the head of the regiments,	  Where the dense-starr'd flag is borne at the head of the regiments,
  Approaching Manhattan up by the long-stretching island,	  Approaching Manhattan up by the long-stretching island,	  Approaching Manhattan up by the long-stretching island,	  Approaching Manhattan up by the long-stretching island,
  Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my countenance,	  Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my countenance,	  Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my countenance,	  Under Niagara, the cataract falling like a veil over my countenance,
  Upon a door-step, upon the horse-block of hard wood outside,	  Upon a door-step, upon the horse-block of hard wood outside,	  Upon a door-step, upon the horse-block of hard wood outside,	  Upon a door-step, upon the horse-block of hard wood outside,
  Upon the race-course, or enjoying picnics or jigs or a good game of	  Upon the race-course, or enjoying picnics or jigs or a good game of	  Upon the race-course, or enjoying picnics or jigs or a good game of	  Upon the race-course, or enjoying picnics or jigs or a good game of
      base-ball,	      base-ball,	      base-ball,	      base-ball,
  At he-festivals, with blackguard gibes, ironical license,	  At he-festivals, with blackguard gibes, ironical license,	  At he-festivals, with blackguard gibes, ironical license,	  At he-festivals, with blackguard gibes, ironical license,
      bull-dances, drinking, laughter,	      bull-dances, drinking, laughter,	      bull-dances, drinking, laughter,	      bull-dances, drinking, laughter,
  At the cider-mill tasting the sweets of the brown mash, sucking the	  At the cider-mill tasting the sweets of the brown mash, sucking the	  At the cider-mill tasting the sweets of the brown mash, sucking the	  At the cider-mill tasting the sweets of the brown mash, sucking the
      juice through a straw,	      juice through a straw,	      juice through a straw,	      juice through a straw,
  At apple-peelings wanting kisses for all the red fruit I find,	  At apple-peelings wanting kisses for all the red fruit I find,	  At apple-peelings wanting kisses for all the red fruit I find,	  At apple-peelings wanting kisses for all the red fruit I find,
  At musters, beach-parties, friendly bees, huskings, house-raisings;	  At musters, beach-parties, friendly bees, huskings, house-raisings;	  At musters, beach-parties, friendly bees, huskings, house-raisings;	  At musters, beach-parties, friendly bees, huskings, house-raisings;
  Where the mocking-bird sounds his delicious gurgles, cackles,	  Where the mocking-bird sounds his delicious gurgles, cackles,	  Where the mocking-bird sounds his delicious gurgles, cackles,	  Where the mocking-bird sounds his delicious gurgles, cackles,
      screams, weeps,	      screams, weeps,	      screams, weeps,	      screams, weeps,
  Where the hay-rick stands in the barn-yard, where the dry-stalks are	  Where the hay-rick stands in the barn-yard, where the dry-stalks are	  Where the hay-rick stands in the barn-yard, where the dry-stalks are	  Where the hay-rick stands in the barn-yard, where the dry-stalks are
      scatter'd, where the brood-cow waits in the hovel,	      scatter'd, where the brood-cow waits in the hovel,	      scatter'd, where the brood-cow waits in the hovel,	      scatter'd, where the brood-cow waits in the hovel,
  Where the bull advances to do his masculine work, where the stud to	  Where the bull advances to do his masculine work, where the stud to	  Where the bull advances to do his masculine work, where the stud to	  Where the bull advances to do his masculine work, where the stud to
      the mare, where the cock is treading the hen,	      the mare, where the cock is treading the hen,	      the mare, where the cock is treading the hen,	      the mare, where the cock is treading the hen,
  Where the heifers browse, where geese nip their food with short jerks,	  Where the heifers browse, where geese nip their food with short jerks,	  Where the heifers browse, where geese nip their food with short jerks,	  Where the heifers browse, where geese nip their food with short jerks,
  Where sun-down shadows lengthen over the limitless and lonesome prairie,	  Where sun-down shadows lengthen over the limitless and lonesome prairie,	  Where sun-down shadows lengthen over the limitless and lonesome prairie,	  Where sun-down shadows lengthen over the limitless and lonesome prairie,
  Where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square miles	  Where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square miles	  Where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square miles	  Where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square miles
      far and near,	      far and near,	      far and near,	      far and near,
  Where the humming-bird shimmers, where the neck of the long-lived	  Where the humming-bird shimmers, where the neck of the long-lived	  Where the humming-bird shimmers, where the neck of the long-lived	  Where the humming-bird shimmers, where the neck of the long-lived
      swan is curving and winding,	      swan is curving and winding,	      swan is curving and winding,	      swan is curving and winding,
  Where the laughing-gull scoots by the shore, where she laughs her	  Where the laughing-gull scoots by the shore, where she laughs her	  Where the laughing-gull scoots by the shore, where she laughs her	  Where the laughing-gull scoots by the shore, where she laughs her
      near-human laugh,	      near-human laugh,	      near-human laugh,	      near-human laugh,
  Where bee-hives range on a gray bench in the garden half hid by the	  Where bee-hives range on a gray bench in the garden half hid by the	  Where bee-hives range on a gray bench in the garden half hid by the	  Where bee-hives range on a gray bench in the garden half hid by the
      high weeds,	      high weeds,	      high weeds,	      high weeds,
  Where band-neck'd partridges roost in a ring on the ground with	  Where band-neck'd partridges roost in a ring on the ground with	  Where band-neck'd partridges roost in a ring on the ground with	  Where band-neck'd partridges roost in a ring on the ground with
      their heads out,	      their heads out,	      their heads out,	      their heads out,
  Where burial coaches enter the arch'd gates of a cemetery,	  Where burial coaches enter the arch'd gates of a cemetery,	  Where burial coaches enter the arch'd gates of a cemetery,	  Where burial coaches enter the arch'd gates of a cemetery,
  Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees,	  Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees,	  Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees,	  Where winter wolves bark amid wastes of snow and icicled trees,
  Where the yellow-crown'd heron comes to the edge of the marsh at	  Where the yellow-crown'd heron comes to the edge of the marsh at	  Where the yellow-crown'd heron comes to the edge of the marsh at	  Where the yellow-crown'd heron comes to the edge of the marsh at
      night and feeds upon small crabs,	      night and feeds upon small crabs,	      night and feeds upon small crabs,	      night and feeds upon small crabs,
  Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the warm noon,	  Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the warm noon,	  Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the warm noon,	  Where the splash of swimmers and divers cools the warm noon,
  Where the katy-did works her chromatic reed on the walnut-tree over	  Where the katy-did works her chromatic reed on the walnut-tree over	  Where the katy-did works her chromatic reed on the walnut-tree over	  Where the katy-did works her chromatic reed on the walnut-tree over
      the well,	      the well,	      the well,	      the well,
  Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-wired leaves,	  Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-wired leaves,	  Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-wired leaves,	  Through patches of citrons and cucumbers with silver-wired leaves,
  Through the salt-lick or orange glade, or under conical firs,	  Through the salt-lick or orange glade, or under conical firs,	  Through the salt-lick or orange glade, or under conical firs,	  Through the salt-lick or orange glade, or under conical firs,
  Through the gymnasium, through the curtain'd saloon, through the	  Through the gymnasium, through the curtain'd saloon, through the	  Through the gymnasium, through the curtain'd saloon, through the	  Through the gymnasium, through the curtain'd saloon, through the
      office or public hall;	      office or public hall;	      office or public hall;	      office or public hall;
  Pleas'd with the native and pleas'd with the foreign, pleas'd with	  Pleas'd with the native and pleas'd with the foreign, pleas'd with	  Pleas'd with the native and pleas'd with the foreign, pleas'd with	  Pleas'd with the native and pleas'd with the foreign, pleas'd with
      the new and old,	      the new and old,	      the new and old,	      the new and old,
  Pleas'd with the homely woman as well as the handsome,	  Pleas'd with the homely woman as well as the handsome,	  Pleas'd with the homely woman as well as the handsome,	  Pleas'd with the homely woman as well as the handsome,
  Pleas'd with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet and talks melodiously,	  Pleas'd with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet and talks melodiously,	  Pleas'd with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet and talks melodiously,	  Pleas'd with the quakeress as she puts off her bonnet and talks melodiously,
  Pleas'd with the tune of the choir of the whitewash'd church,	  Pleas'd with the tune of the choir of the whitewash'd church,	  Pleas'd with the tune of the choir of the whitewash'd church,	  Pleas'd with the tune of the choir of the whitewash'd church,
  Pleas'd with the earnest words of the sweating Methodist preacher,	  Pleas'd with the earnest words of the sweating Methodist preacher,	  Pleas'd with the earnest words of the sweating Methodist preacher,	  Pleas'd with the earnest words of the sweating Methodist preacher,
      impress'd seriously at the camp-meeting;	      impress'd seriously at the camp-meeting;	      impress'd seriously at the camp-meeting;	      impress'd seriously at the camp-meeting;
  Looking in at the shop-windows of Broadway the whole forenoon,	  Looking in at the shop-windows of Broadway the whole forenoon,	  Looking in at the shop-windows of Broadway the whole forenoon,	  Looking in at the shop-windows of Broadway the whole forenoon,
      flatting the flesh of my nose on the thick plate glass,	      flatting the flesh of my nose on the thick plate glass,	      flatting the flesh of my nose on the thick plate glass,	      flatting the flesh of my nose on the thick plate glass,
  Wandering the same afternoon with my face turn'd up to the clouds,	  Wandering the same afternoon with my face turn'd up to the clouds,	  Wandering the same afternoon with my face turn'd up to the clouds,	  Wandering the same afternoon with my face turn'd up to the clouds,
      or down a lane or along the beach,	      or down a lane or along the beach,	      or down a lane or along the beach,	      or down a lane or along the beach,
  My right and left arms round the sides of two friends, and I in the middle;	  My right and left arms round the sides of two friends, and I in the middle;	  My right and left arms round the sides of two friends, and I in the middle;	  My right and left arms round the sides of two friends, and I in the middle;
  Coming home with the silent and dark-cheek'd bush-boy, (behind me	  Coming home with the silent and dark-cheek'd bush-boy, (behind me	  Coming home with the silent and dark-cheek'd bush-boy, (behind me	  Coming home with the silent and dark-cheek'd bush-boy, (behind me
      he rides at the drape of the day,)	      he rides at the drape of the day,)	      he rides at the drape of the day,)	      he rides at the drape of the day,)
  Far from the settlements studying the print of animals' feet, or the	  Far from the settlements studying the print of animals' feet, or the	  Far from the settlements studying the print of animals' feet, or the	  Far from the settlements studying the print of animals' feet, or the
      moccasin print,	      moccasin print,	      moccasin print,	      moccasin print,
  By the cot in the hospital reaching lemonade to a feverish patient,	  By the cot in the hospital reaching lemonade to a feverish patient,	  By the cot in the hospital reaching lemonade to a feverish patient,	  By the cot in the hospital reaching lemonade to a feverish patient,
  Nigh the coffin'd corpse when all is still, examining with a candle;	  Nigh the coffin'd corpse when all is still, examining with a candle;	  Nigh the coffin'd corpse when all is still, examining with a candle;	  Nigh the coffin'd corpse when all is still, examining with a candle;
  Voyaging to every port to dicker and adventure,	  Voyaging to every port to dicker and adventure,	  Voyaging to every port to dicker and adventure,	  Voyaging to every port to dicker and adventure,
  Hurrying with the modern crowd as eager and fickle as any,	  Hurrying with the modern crowd as eager and fickle as any,	  Hurrying with the modern crowd as eager and fickle as any,	  Hurrying with the modern crowd as eager and fickle as any,
  Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife him,	  Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife him,	  Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife him,	  Hot toward one I hate, ready in my madness to knife him,
  Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts gone from me a long while,	  Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts gone from me a long while,	  Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts gone from me a long while,	  Solitary at midnight in my back yard, my thoughts gone from me a long while,
  Walking the old hills of Judaea with the beautiful gentle God by my side,	  Walking the old hills of Judaea with the beautiful gentle God by my side,	  Walking the old hills of Judaea with the beautiful gentle God by my side,	  Walking the old hills of Judaea with the beautiful gentle God by my side,
  Speeding through space, speeding through heaven and the stars,	  Speeding through space, speeding through heaven and the stars,	  Speeding through space, speeding through heaven and the stars,	  Speeding through space, speeding through heaven and the stars,
  Speeding amid the seven satellites and the broad ring, and the	  Speeding amid the seven satellites and the broad ring, and the	  Speeding amid the seven satellites and the broad ring, and the	  Speeding amid the seven satellites and the broad ring, and the
      diameter of eighty thousand miles,	      diameter of eighty thousand miles,	      diameter of eighty thousand miles,	      diameter of eighty thousand miles,
  Speeding with tail'd meteors, throwing fire-balls like the rest,	  Speeding with tail'd meteors, throwing fire-balls like the rest,	  Speeding with tail'd meteors, throwing fire-balls like the rest,	  Speeding with tail'd meteors, throwing fire-balls like the rest,
  Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full mother in its belly,	  Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full mother in its belly,	  Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full mother in its belly,	  Carrying the crescent child that carries its own full mother in its belly,
  Storming, enjoying, planning, loving, cautioning,	  Storming, enjoying, planning, loving, cautioning,	  Storming, enjoying, planning, loving, cautioning,	  Storming, enjoying, planning, loving, cautioning,
  Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing,	  Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing,	  Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing,	  Backing and filling, appearing and disappearing,
  I tread day and night such roads.	  I tread day and night such roads.	  I tread day and night such roads.	  I tread day and night such roads.
			
  I visit the orchards of spheres and look at the product,	  I visit the orchards of spheres and look at the product,	  I visit the orchards of spheres and look at the product,	  I visit the orchards of spheres and look at the product,
  And look at quintillions ripen'd and look at quintillions green.	  And look at quintillions ripen'd and look at quintillions green.	  And look at quintillions ripen'd and look at quintillions green.	  And look at quintillions ripen'd and look at quintillions green.
			
  I fly those flights of a fluid and swallowing soul,	  I fly those flights of a fluid and swallowing soul,	  I fly those flights of a fluid and swallowing soul,	  I fly those flights of a fluid and swallowing soul,
  My course runs below the soundings of plummets.	  My course runs below the soundings of plummets.	  My course runs below the soundings of plummets.	  My course runs below the soundings of plummets.
			
  I help myself to material and immaterial,	  I help myself to material and immaterial,	  I help myself to material and immaterial,	  I help myself to material and immaterial,
  No guard can shut me off, no law prevent me.	  No guard can shut me off, no law prevent me.	  No guard can shut me off, no law prevent me.	  No guard can shut me off, no law prevent me.
			
  I anchor my ship for a little while only,	  I anchor my ship for a little while only,	  I anchor my ship for a little while only,	  I anchor my ship for a little while only,
  My messengers continually cruise away or bring their returns to me.	  My messengers continually cruise away or bring their returns to me.	  My messengers continually cruise away or bring their returns to me.	  My messengers continually cruise away or bring their returns to me.
			
  I go hunting polar furs and the seal, leaping chasms with a	  I go hunting polar furs and the seal, leaping chasms with a	  I go hunting polar furs and the seal, leaping chasms with a	  I go hunting polar furs and the seal, leaping chasms with a
      pike-pointed staff, clinging to topples of brittle and blue.	      pike-pointed staff, clinging to topples of brittle and blue.	      pike-pointed staff, clinging to topples of brittle and blue.	      pike-pointed staff, clinging to topples of brittle and blue.
			
  I ascend to the foretruck,	  I ascend to the foretruck,	  I ascend to the foretruck,	  I ascend to the foretruck,
  I take my place late at night in the crow's-nest,	  I take my place late at night in the crow's-nest,	  I take my place late at night in the crow's-nest,	  I take my place late at night in the crow's-nest,
  We sail the arctic sea, it is plenty light enough,	  We sail the arctic sea, it is plenty light enough,	  We sail the arctic sea, it is plenty light enough,	  We sail the arctic sea, it is plenty light enough,
  Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on the wonderful beauty,	  Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on the wonderful beauty,	  Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on the wonderful beauty,	  Through the clear atmosphere I stretch around on the wonderful beauty,
  The enormous masses of ice pass me and I pass them, the scenery is	  The enormous masses of ice pass me and I pass them, the scenery is	  The enormous masses of ice pass me and I pass them, the scenery is	  The enormous masses of ice pass me and I pass them, the scenery is
      plain in all directions,	      plain in all directions,	      plain in all directions,	      plain in all directions,
  The white-topt mountains show in the distance, I fling out my	  The white-topt mountains show in the distance, I fling out my	  The white-topt mountains show in the distance, I fling out my	  The white-topt mountains show in the distance, I fling out my
      fancies toward them,	      fancies toward them,	      fancies toward them,	      fancies toward them,
  We are approaching some great battle-field in which we are soon to	  We are approaching some great battle-field in which we are soon to	  We are approaching some great battle-field in which we are soon to	  We are approaching some great battle-field in which we are soon to
      be engaged,	      be engaged,	      be engaged,	      be engaged,
  We pass the colossal outposts of the encampment, we pass with still	  We pass the colossal outposts of the encampment, we pass with still	  We pass the colossal outposts of the encampment, we pass with still	  We pass the colossal outposts of the encampment, we pass with still
      feet and caution,	      feet and caution,	      feet and caution,	      feet and caution,
  Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and ruin'd city,	  Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and ruin'd city,	  Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and ruin'd city,	  Or we are entering by the suburbs some vast and ruin'd city,
  The blocks and fallen architecture more than all the living cities	  The blocks and fallen architecture more than all the living cities	  The blocks and fallen architecture more than all the living cities	  The blocks and fallen architecture more than all the living cities
      of the globe.	      of the globe.	      of the globe.	      of the globe.
			
  I am a free companion, I bivouac by invading watchfires,	  I am a free companion, I bivouac by invading watchfires,	  I am a free companion, I bivouac by invading watchfires,	  I am a free companion, I bivouac by invading watchfires,
  I turn the bridegroom out of bed and stay with the bride myself,	  I turn the bridegroom out of bed and stay with the bride myself,	  I turn the bridegroom out of bed and stay with the bride myself,	  I turn the bridegroom out of bed and stay with the bride myself,
  I tighten her all night to my thighs and lips.	  I tighten her all night to my thighs and lips.	  I tighten her all night to my thighs and lips.	  I tighten her all night to my thighs and lips.
			
  My voice is the wife's voice, the screech by the rail of the stairs,	  My voice is the wife's voice, the screech by the rail of the stairs,	  My voice is the wife's voice, the screech by the rail of the stairs,	  My voice is the wife's voice, the screech by the rail of the stairs,
  They fetch my man's body up dripping and drown'd.	  They fetch my man's body up dripping and drown'd.	  They fetch my man's body up dripping and drown'd.	  They fetch my man's body up dripping and drown'd.
			
  I understand the large hearts of heroes,	  I understand the large hearts of heroes,	  I understand the large hearts of heroes,	  I understand the large hearts of heroes,
  The courage of present times and all times,	  The courage of present times and all times,	  The courage of present times and all times,	  The courage of present times and all times,
  How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless wreck of the	  How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless wreck of the	  How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless wreck of the	  How the skipper saw the crowded and rudderless wreck of the
      steamship, and Death chasing it up and down the storm,	      steamship, and Death chasing it up and down the storm,	      steamship, and Death chasing it up and down the storm,	      steamship, and Death chasing it up and down the storm,
  How he knuckled tight and gave not back an inch, and was faithful of	  How he knuckled tight and gave not back an inch, and was faithful of	  How he knuckled tight and gave not back an inch, and was faithful of	  How he knuckled tight and gave not back an inch, and was faithful of
      days and faithful of nights,	      days and faithful of nights,	      days and faithful of nights,	      days and faithful of nights,
  And chalk'd in large letters on a board, Be of good cheer, we will	  And chalk'd in large letters on a board, Be of good cheer, we will	  And chalk'd in large letters on a board, Be of good cheer, we will	  And chalk'd in large letters on a board, Be of good cheer, we will
      not desert you;	      not desert you;	      not desert you;	      not desert you;
  How he follow'd with them and tack'd with them three days and	  How he follow'd with them and tack'd with them three days and	  How he follow'd with them and tack'd with them three days and	  How he follow'd with them and tack'd with them three days and
      would not give it up,	      would not give it up,	      would not give it up,	      would not give it up,
  How he saved the drifting company at last,	  How he saved the drifting company at last,	  How he saved the drifting company at last,	  How he saved the drifting company at last,
  How the lank loose-gown'd women look'd when boated from the	  How the lank loose-gown'd women look'd when boated from the	  How the lank loose-gown'd women look'd when boated from the	  How the lank loose-gown'd women look'd when boated from the
      side of their prepared graves,	      side of their prepared graves,	      side of their prepared graves,	      side of their prepared graves,
  How the silent old-faced infants and the lifted sick, and the	  How the silent old-faced infants and the lifted sick, and the	  How the silent old-faced infants and the lifted sick, and the	  How the silent old-faced infants and the lifted sick, and the
      sharp-lipp'd unshaved men;	      sharp-lipp'd unshaved men;	      sharp-lipp'd unshaved men;	      sharp-lipp'd unshaved men;
  All this I swallow, it tastes good, I like it well, it becomes mine,	  All this I swallow, it tastes good, I like it well, it becomes mine,	  All this I swallow, it tastes good, I like it well, it becomes mine,	  All this I swallow, it tastes good, I like it well, it becomes mine,
  I am the man, I suffer'd, I was there.	  I am the man, I suffer'd, I was there.	  I am the man, I suffer'd, I was there.	  I am the man, I suffer'd, I was there.
			
  The disdain and calmness of martyrs,	  The disdain and calmness of martyrs,	  The disdain and calmness of martyrs,	  The disdain and calmness of martyrs,
  The mother of old, condemn'd for a witch, burnt with dry wood, her	  The mother of old, condemn'd for a witch, burnt with dry wood, her	  The mother of old, condemn'd for a witch, burnt with dry wood, her	  The mother of old, condemn'd for a witch, burnt with dry wood, her
      children gazing on,	      children gazing on,	      children gazing on,	      children gazing on,
  The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the fence,	  The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the fence,	  The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the fence,	  The hounded slave that flags in the race, leans by the fence,
      blowing, cover'd with sweat,	      blowing, cover'd with sweat,	      blowing, cover'd with sweat,	      blowing, cover'd with sweat,
  The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck, the murderous	  The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck, the murderous	  The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck, the murderous	  The twinges that sting like needles his legs and neck, the murderous
      buckshot and the bullets,	      buckshot and the bullets,	      buckshot and the bullets,	      buckshot and the bullets,
  All these I feel or am.	  All these I feel or am.	  All these I feel or am.	  All these I feel or am.
			
  I am the hounded slave, I wince at the bite of the dogs,	  I am the hounded slave, I wince at the bite of the dogs,	  I am the hounded slave, I wince at the bite of the dogs,	  I am the hounded slave, I wince at the bite of the dogs,
  Hell and despair are upon me, crack and again crack the marksmen,	  Hell and despair are upon me, crack and again crack the marksmen,	  Hell and despair are upon me, crack and again crack the marksmen,	  Hell and despair are upon me, crack and again crack the marksmen,
  I clutch the rails of the fence, my gore dribs, thinn'd with the	  I clutch the rails of the fence, my gore dribs, thinn'd with the	  I clutch the rails of the fence, my gore dribs, thinn'd with the	  I clutch the rails of the fence, my gore dribs, thinn'd with the
      ooze of my skin,	      ooze of my skin,	      ooze of my skin,	      ooze of my skin,
  I fall on the weeds and stones,	  I fall on the weeds and stones,	  I fall on the weeds and stones,	  I fall on the weeds and stones,
  The riders spur their unwilling horses, haul close,	  The riders spur their unwilling horses, haul close,	  The riders spur their unwilling horses, haul close,	  The riders spur their unwilling horses, haul close,
  Taunt my dizzy ears and beat me violently over the head with whip-stocks.	  Taunt my dizzy ears and beat me violently over the head with whip-stocks.	  Taunt my dizzy ears and beat me violently over the head with whip-stocks.	  Taunt my dizzy ears and beat me violently over the head with whip-stocks.
			
  Agonies are one of my changes of garments,	  Agonies are one of my changes of garments,	  Agonies are one of my changes of garments,	  Agonies are one of my changes of garments,
  I do not ask the wounded person how he feels, I myself become the	  I do not ask the wounded person how he feels, I myself become the	  I do not ask the wounded person how he feels, I myself become the	  I do not ask the wounded person how he feels, I myself become the
      wounded person,	      wounded person,	      wounded person,	      wounded person,
  My hurts turn livid upon me as I lean on a cane and observe.	  My hurts turn livid upon me as I lean on a cane and observe.	  My hurts turn livid upon me as I lean on a cane and observe.	  My hurts turn livid upon me as I lean on a cane and observe.
			
  I am the mash'd fireman with breast-bone broken,	  I am the mash'd fireman with breast-bone broken,	  I am the mash'd fireman with breast-bone broken,	  I am the mash'd fireman with breast-bone broken,
  Tumbling walls buried me in their debris,	  Tumbling walls buried me in their debris,	  Tumbling walls buried me in their debris,	  Tumbling walls buried me in their debris,
  Heat and smoke I inspired, I heard the yelling shouts of my comrades,	  Heat and smoke I inspired, I heard the yelling shouts of my comrades,	  Heat and smoke I inspired, I heard the yelling shouts of my comrades,	  Heat and smoke I inspired, I heard the yelling shouts of my comrades,
  I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels,	  I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels,	  I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels,	  I heard the distant click of their picks and shovels,
  They have clear'd the beams away, they tenderly lift me forth.	  They have clear'd the beams away, they tenderly lift me forth.	  They have clear'd the beams away, they tenderly lift me forth.	  They have clear'd the beams away, they tenderly lift me forth.
			
  I lie in the night air in my red shirt, the pervading hush is for my sake,	  I lie in the night air in my red shirt, the pervading hush is for my sake,	  I lie in the night air in my red shirt, the pervading hush is for my sake,	  I lie in the night air in my red shirt, the pervading hush is for my sake,
  Painless after all I lie exhausted but not so unhappy,	  Painless after all I lie exhausted but not so unhappy,	  Painless after all I lie exhausted but not so unhappy,	  Painless after all I lie exhausted but not so unhappy,
  White and beautiful are the faces around me, the heads are bared	  White and beautiful are the faces around me, the heads are bared	  White and beautiful are the faces around me, the heads are bared	  White and beautiful are the faces around me, the heads are bared
      of their fire-caps,	      of their fire-caps,	      of their fire-caps,	      of their fire-caps,
  The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the torches.	  The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the torches.	  The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the torches.	  The kneeling crowd fades with the light of the torches.
			
  Distant and dead resuscitate,	  Distant and dead resuscitate,	  Distant and dead resuscitate,	  Distant and dead resuscitate,
  They show as the dial or move as the hands of me, I am the clock myself.	  They show as the dial or move as the hands of me, I am the clock myself.	  They show as the dial or move as the hands of me, I am the clock myself.	  They show as the dial or move as the hands of me, I am the clock myself.
			
  I am an old artillerist, I tell of my fort's bombardment,	  I am an old artillerist, I tell of my fort's bombardment,	  I am an old artillerist, I tell of my fort's bombardment,	  I am an old artillerist, I tell of my fort's bombardment,
  I am there again.	  I am there again.	  I am there again.	  I am there again.
			
  Again the long roll of the drummers,	  Again the long roll of the drummers,	  Again the long roll of the drummers,	  Again the long roll of the drummers,
  Again the attacking cannon, mortars,	  Again the attacking cannon, mortars,	  Again the attacking cannon, mortars,	  Again the attacking cannon, mortars,
  Again to my listening ears the cannon responsive.	  Again to my listening ears the cannon responsive.	  Again to my listening ears the cannon responsive.	  Again to my listening ears the cannon responsive.
			
  I take part, I see and hear the whole,	  I take part, I see and hear the whole,	  I take part, I see and hear the whole,	  I take part, I see and hear the whole,
  The cries, curses, roar, the plaudits for well-aim'd shots,	  The cries, curses, roar, the plaudits for well-aim'd shots,	  The cries, curses, roar, the plaudits for well-aim'd shots,	  The cries, curses, roar, the plaudits for well-aim'd shots,
  The ambulanza slowly passing trailing its red drip,	  The ambulanza slowly passing trailing its red drip,	  The ambulanza slowly passing trailing its red drip,	  The ambulanza slowly passing trailing its red drip,
  Workmen searching after damages, making indispensable repairs,	  Workmen searching after damages, making indispensable repairs,	  Workmen searching after damages, making indispensable repairs,	  Workmen searching after damages, making indispensable repairs,
  The fall of grenades through the rent roof, the fan-shaped explosion,	  The fall of grenades through the rent roof, the fan-shaped explosion,	  The fall of grenades through the rent roof, the fan-shaped explosion,	  The fall of grenades through the rent roof, the fan-shaped explosion,
  The whizz of limbs, heads, stone, wood, iron, high in the air.	  The whizz of limbs, heads, stone, wood, iron, high in the air.	  The whizz of limbs, heads, stone, wood, iron, high in the air.	  The whizz of limbs, heads, stone, wood, iron, high in the air.
			
  Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general, he furiously waves	  Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general, he furiously waves	  Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general, he furiously waves	  Again gurgles the mouth of my dying general, he furiously waves
      with his hand,	      with his hand,	      with his hand,	      with his hand,
  He gasps through the clot Mind not me--mind--the entrenchments.	  He gasps through the clot Mind not me--mind--the entrenchments.	  He gasps through the clot Mind not me--mind--the entrenchments.	  He gasps through the clot Mind not me--mind--the entrenchments.
			
       34	       34	       34	       34
  Now I tell what I knew in Texas in my early youth,	  Now I tell what I knew in Texas in my early youth,	  Now I tell what I knew in Texas in my early youth,	  Now I tell what I knew in Texas in my early youth,
  (I tell not the fall of Alamo,	  (I tell not the fall of Alamo,	  (I tell not the fall of Alamo,	  (I tell not the fall of Alamo,
  Not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo,	  Not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo,	  Not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo,	  Not one escaped to tell the fall of Alamo,
  The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo,)	  The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo,)	  The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo,)	  The hundred and fifty are dumb yet at Alamo,)
  'Tis the tale of the murder in cold blood of four hundred and twelve	  'Tis the tale of the murder in cold blood of four hundred and twelve	  'Tis the tale of the murder in cold blood of four hundred and twelve	  'Tis the tale of the murder in cold blood of four hundred and twelve
      young men.	      young men.	      young men.	      young men.
			
  Retreating they had form'd in a hollow square with their baggage for	  Retreating they had form'd in a hollow square with their baggage for	  Retreating they had form'd in a hollow square with their baggage for	  Retreating they had form'd in a hollow square with their baggage for
      breastworks,	      breastworks,	      breastworks,	      breastworks,
  Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemies, nine times their	  Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemies, nine times their	  Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemies, nine times their	  Nine hundred lives out of the surrounding enemies, nine times their
      number, was the price they took in advance,	      number, was the price they took in advance,	      number, was the price they took in advance,	      number, was the price they took in advance,
  Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition gone,	  Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition gone,	  Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition gone,	  Their colonel was wounded and their ammunition gone,
  They treated for an honorable capitulation, receiv'd writing and	  They treated for an honorable capitulation, receiv'd writing and	  They treated for an honorable capitulation, receiv'd writing and	  They treated for an honorable capitulation, receiv'd writing and
      seal, gave up their arms and march'd back prisoners of war.	      seal, gave up their arms and march'd back prisoners of war.	      seal, gave up their arms and march'd back prisoners of war.	      seal, gave up their arms and march'd back prisoners of war.
			
  They were the glory of the race of rangers,	  They were the glory of the race of rangers,	  They were the glory of the race of rangers,	  They were the glory of the race of rangers,
  Matchless with horse, rifle, song, supper, courtship,	  Matchless with horse, rifle, song, supper, courtship,	  Matchless with horse, rifle, song, supper, courtship,	  Matchless with horse, rifle, song, supper, courtship,
  Large, turbulent, generous, handsome, proud, and affectionate,	  Large, turbulent, generous, handsome, proud, and affectionate,	  Large, turbulent, generous, handsome, proud, and affectionate,	  Large, turbulent, generous, handsome, proud, and affectionate,
  Bearded, sunburnt, drest in the free costume of hunters,	  Bearded, sunburnt, drest in the free costume of hunters,	  Bearded, sunburnt, drest in the free costume of hunters,	  Bearded, sunburnt, drest in the free costume of hunters,
  Not a single one over thirty years of age.	  Not a single one over thirty years of age.	  Not a single one over thirty years of age.	  Not a single one over thirty years of age.
			
  The second First-day morning they were brought out in squads and	  The second First-day morning they were brought out in squads and	  The second First-day morning they were brought out in squads and	  The second First-day morning they were brought out in squads and
      massacred, it was beautiful early summer,	      massacred, it was beautiful early summer,	      massacred, it was beautiful early summer,	      massacred, it was beautiful early summer,
  The work commenced about five o'clock and was over by eight.	  The work commenced about five o'clock and was over by eight.	  The work commenced about five o'clock and was over by eight.	  The work commenced about five o'clock and was over by eight.
			
  None obey'd the command to kneel,	  None obey'd the command to kneel,	  None obey'd the command to kneel,	  None obey'd the command to kneel,
  Some made a mad and helpless rush, some stood stark and straight,	  Some made a mad and helpless rush, some stood stark and straight,	  Some made a mad and helpless rush, some stood stark and straight,	  Some made a mad and helpless rush, some stood stark and straight,
  A few fell at once, shot in the temple or heart, the living and dead	  A few fell at once, shot in the temple or heart, the living and dead	  A few fell at once, shot in the temple or heart, the living and dead	  A few fell at once, shot in the temple or heart, the living and dead
      lay together,	      lay together,	      lay together,	      lay together,
  The maim'd and mangled dug in the dirt, the new-comers saw them there,	  The maim'd and mangled dug in the dirt, the new-comers saw them there,	  The maim'd and mangled dug in the dirt, the new-comers saw them there,	  The maim'd and mangled dug in the dirt, the new-comers saw them there,
  Some half-kill'd attempted to crawl away,	  Some half-kill'd attempted to crawl away,	  Some half-kill'd attempted to crawl away,	  Some half-kill'd attempted to crawl away,
  These were despatch'd with bayonets or batter'd with the blunts of muskets,	  These were despatch'd with bayonets or batter'd with the blunts of muskets,	  These were despatch'd with bayonets or batter'd with the blunts of muskets,	  These were despatch'd with bayonets or batter'd with the blunts of muskets,
  A youth not seventeen years old seiz'd his assassin till two more	  A youth not seventeen years old seiz'd his assassin till two more	  A youth not seventeen years old seiz'd his assassin till two more	  A youth not seventeen years old seiz'd his assassin till two more
      came to release him,	      came to release him,	      came to release him,	      came to release him,
  The three were all torn and cover'd with the boy's blood.	  The three were all torn and cover'd with the boy's blood.	  The three were all torn and cover'd with the boy's blood.	  The three were all torn and cover'd with the boy's blood.
			
  At eleven o'clock began the burning of the bodies;	  At eleven o'clock began the burning of the bodies;	  At eleven o'clock began the burning of the bodies;	  At eleven o'clock began the burning of the bodies;
  That is the tale of the murder of the four hundred and twelve young men.	  That is the tale of the murder of the four hundred and twelve young men.	  That is the tale of the murder of the four hundred and twelve young men.	  That is the tale of the murder of the four hundred and twelve young men.
			
       35	       35	       35	       35
  Would you hear of an old-time sea-fight?	  Would you hear of an old-time sea-fight?	  Would you hear of an old-time sea-fight?	  Would you hear of an old-time sea-fight?
  Would you learn who won by the light of the moon and stars?	  Would you learn who won by the light of the moon and stars?	  Would you learn who won by the light of the moon and stars?	  Would you learn who won by the light of the moon and stars?
  List to the yarn, as my grandmother's father the sailor told it to me.	  List to the yarn, as my grandmother's father the sailor told it to me.	  List to the yarn, as my grandmother's father the sailor told it to me.	  List to the yarn, as my grandmother's father the sailor told it to me.
			
  Our foe was no skulk in his ship I tell you, (said he,)	  Our foe was no skulk in his ship I tell you, (said he,)	  Our foe was no skulk in his ship I tell you, (said he,)	  Our foe was no skulk in his ship I tell you, (said he,)
  His was the surly English pluck, and there is no tougher or truer,	  His was the surly English pluck, and there is no tougher or truer,	  His was the surly English pluck, and there is no tougher or truer,	  His was the surly English pluck, and there is no tougher or truer,
      and never was, and never will be;	      and never was, and never will be;	      and never was, and never will be;	      and never was, and never will be;
  Along the lower'd eve he came horribly raking us.	  Along the lower'd eve he came horribly raking us.	  Along the lower'd eve he came horribly raking us.	  Along the lower'd eve he came horribly raking us.
			
  We closed with him, the yards entangled, the cannon touch'd,	  We closed with him, the yards entangled, the cannon touch'd,	  We closed with him, the yards entangled, the cannon touch'd,	  We closed with him, the yards entangled, the cannon touch'd,
  My captain lash'd fast with his own hands.	  My captain lash'd fast with his own hands.	  My captain lash'd fast with his own hands.	  My captain lash'd fast with his own hands.
			
  We had receiv'd some eighteen pound shots under the water,	  We had receiv'd some eighteen pound shots under the water,	  We had receiv'd some eighteen pound shots under the water,	  We had receiv'd some eighteen pound shots under the water,
  On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at the first fire,	  On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at the first fire,	  On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at the first fire,	  On our lower-gun-deck two large pieces had burst at the first fire,
      killing all around and blowing up overhead.	      killing all around and blowing up overhead.	      killing all around and blowing up overhead.	      killing all around and blowing up overhead.
			
  Fighting at sun-down, fighting at dark,	  Fighting at sun-down, fighting at dark,	  Fighting at sun-down, fighting at dark,	  Fighting at sun-down, fighting at dark,
  Ten o'clock at night, the full moon well up, our leaks on the gain,	  Ten o'clock at night, the full moon well up, our leaks on the gain,	  Ten o'clock at night, the full moon well up, our leaks on the gain,	  Ten o'clock at night, the full moon well up, our leaks on the gain,
      and five feet of water reported,	      and five feet of water reported,	      and five feet of water reported,	      and five feet of water reported,
  The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in the after-hold	  The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in the after-hold	  The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in the after-hold	  The master-at-arms loosing the prisoners confined in the after-hold
      to give them a chance for themselves.	      to give them a chance for themselves.	      to give them a chance for themselves.	      to give them a chance for themselves.
			
  The transit to and from the magazine is now stopt by the sentinels,	  The transit to and from the magazine is now stopt by the sentinels,	  The transit to and from the magazine is now stopt by the sentinels,	  The transit to and from the magazine is now stopt by the sentinels,
  They see so many strange faces they do not know whom to trust.	  They see so many strange faces they do not know whom to trust.	  They see so many strange faces they do not know whom to trust.	  They see so many strange faces they do not know whom to trust.
			
  Our frigate takes fire,	  Our frigate takes fire,	  Our frigate takes fire,	  Our frigate takes fire,
  The other asks if we demand quarter?	  The other asks if we demand quarter?	  The other asks if we demand quarter?	  The other asks if we demand quarter?
  If our colors are struck and the fighting done?	  If our colors are struck and the fighting done?	  If our colors are struck and the fighting done?	  If our colors are struck and the fighting done?
			
  Now I laugh content, for I hear the voice of my little captain,	  Now I laugh content, for I hear the voice of my little captain,	  Now I laugh content, for I hear the voice of my little captain,	  Now I laugh content, for I hear the voice of my little captain,
  We have not struck, he composedly cries, we have just begun our part	  We have not struck, he composedly cries, we have just begun our part	  We have not struck, he composedly cries, we have just begun our part	  We have not struck, he composedly cries, we have just begun our part
      of the fighting.	      of the fighting.	      of the fighting.	      of the fighting.
			
  Only three guns are in use,	  Only three guns are in use,	  Only three guns are in use,	  Only three guns are in use,
  One is directed by the captain himself against the enemy's main-mast,	  One is directed by the captain himself against the enemy's main-mast,	  One is directed by the captain himself against the enemy's main-mast,	  One is directed by the captain himself against the enemy's main-mast,
  Two well serv'd with grape and canister silence his musketry and	  Two well serv'd with grape and canister silence his musketry and	  Two well serv'd with grape and canister silence his musketry and	  Two well serv'd with grape and canister silence his musketry and
      clear his decks.	      clear his decks.	      clear his decks.	      clear his decks.
			
  The tops alone second the fire of this little battery, especially	  The tops alone second the fire of this little battery, especially	  The tops alone second the fire of this little battery, especially	  The tops alone second the fire of this little battery, especially
      the main-top,	      the main-top,	      the main-top,	      the main-top,
  They hold out bravely during the whole of the action.	  They hold out bravely during the whole of the action.	  They hold out bravely during the whole of the action.	  They hold out bravely during the whole of the action.
			
  Not a moment's cease,	  Not a moment's cease,	  Not a moment's cease,	  Not a moment's cease,
  The leaks gain fast on the pumps, the fire eats toward the powder-magazine.	  The leaks gain fast on the pumps, the fire eats toward the powder-magazine.	  The leaks gain fast on the pumps, the fire eats toward the powder-magazine.	  The leaks gain fast on the pumps, the fire eats toward the powder-magazine.
			
  One of the pumps has been shot away, it is generally thought we are sinking.	  One of the pumps has been shot away, it is generally thought we are sinking.	  One of the pumps has been shot away, it is generally thought we are sinking.	  One of the pumps has been shot away, it is generally thought we are sinking.
			
  Serene stands the little captain,	  Serene stands the little captain,	  Serene stands the little captain,	  Serene stands the little captain,
  He is not hurried, his voice is neither high nor low,	  He is not hurried, his voice is neither high nor low,	  He is not hurried, his voice is neither high nor low,	  He is not hurried, his voice is neither high nor low,
  His eyes give more light to us than our battle-lanterns.	  His eyes give more light to us than our battle-lanterns.	  His eyes give more light to us than our battle-lanterns.	  His eyes give more light to us than our battle-lanterns.
			
  Toward twelve there in the beams of the moon they surrender to us.	  Toward twelve there in the beams of the moon they surrender to us.	  Toward twelve there in the beams of the moon they surrender to us.	  Toward twelve there in the beams of the moon they surrender to us.
			
       36	       36	       36	       36
  Stretch'd and still lies the midnight,	  Stretch'd and still lies the midnight,	  Stretch'd and still lies the midnight,	  Stretch'd and still lies the midnight,
  Two great hulls motionless on the breast of the darkness,	  Two great hulls motionless on the breast of the darkness,	  Two great hulls motionless on the breast of the darkness,	  Two great hulls motionless on the breast of the darkness,
  Our vessel riddled and slowly sinking, preparations to pass to the	  Our vessel riddled and slowly sinking, preparations to pass to the	  Our vessel riddled and slowly sinking, preparations to pass to the	  Our vessel riddled and slowly sinking, preparations to pass to the
      one we have conquer'd,	      one we have conquer'd,	      one we have conquer'd,	      one we have conquer'd,
  The captain on the quarter-deck coldly giving his orders through a	  The captain on the quarter-deck coldly giving his orders through a	  The captain on the quarter-deck coldly giving his orders through a	  The captain on the quarter-deck coldly giving his orders through a
      countenance white as a sheet,	      countenance white as a sheet,	      countenance white as a sheet,	      countenance white as a sheet,
  Near by the corpse of the child that serv'd in the cabin,	  Near by the corpse of the child that serv'd in the cabin,	  Near by the corpse of the child that serv'd in the cabin,	  Near by the corpse of the child that serv'd in the cabin,
  The dead face of an old salt with long white hair and carefully	  The dead face of an old salt with long white hair and carefully	  The dead face of an old salt with long white hair and carefully	  The dead face of an old salt with long white hair and carefully
      curl'd whiskers,	      curl'd whiskers,	      curl'd whiskers,	      curl'd whiskers,
  The flames spite of all that can be done flickering aloft and below,	  The flames spite of all that can be done flickering aloft and below,	  The flames spite of all that can be done flickering aloft and below,	  The flames spite of all that can be done flickering aloft and below,
  The husky voices of the two or three officers yet fit for duty,	  The husky voices of the two or three officers yet fit for duty,	  The husky voices of the two or three officers yet fit for duty,	  The husky voices of the two or three officers yet fit for duty,
  Formless stacks of bodies and bodies by themselves, dabs of flesh	  Formless stacks of bodies and bodies by themselves, dabs of flesh	  Formless stacks of bodies and bodies by themselves, dabs of flesh	  Formless stacks of bodies and bodies by themselves, dabs of flesh
      upon the masts and spars,	      upon the masts and spars,	      upon the masts and spars,	      upon the masts and spars,
  Cut of cordage, dangle of rigging, slight shock of the soothe of waves,	  Cut of cordage, dangle of rigging, slight shock of the soothe of waves,	  Cut of cordage, dangle of rigging, slight shock of the soothe of waves,	  Cut of cordage, dangle of rigging, slight shock of the soothe of waves,
  Black and impassive guns, litter of powder-parcels, strong scent,	  Black and impassive guns, litter of powder-parcels, strong scent,	  Black and impassive guns, litter of powder-parcels, strong scent,	  Black and impassive guns, litter of powder-parcels, strong scent,
  A few large stars overhead, silent and mournful shining,	  A few large stars overhead, silent and mournful shining,	  A few large stars overhead, silent and mournful shining,	  A few large stars overhead, silent and mournful shining,
  Delicate sniffs of sea-breeze, smells of sedgy grass and fields by	  Delicate sniffs of sea-breeze, smells of sedgy grass and fields by	  Delicate sniffs of sea-breeze, smells of sedgy grass and fields by	  Delicate sniffs of sea-breeze, smells of sedgy grass and fields by
      the shore, death-messages given in charge to survivors,	      the shore, death-messages given in charge to survivors,	      the shore, death-messages given in charge to survivors,	      the shore, death-messages given in charge to survivors,
  The hiss of the surgeon's knife, the gnawing teeth of his saw,	  The hiss of the surgeon's knife, the gnawing teeth of his saw,	  The hiss of the surgeon's knife, the gnawing teeth of his saw,	  The hiss of the surgeon's knife, the gnawing teeth of his saw,
  Wheeze, cluck, swash of falling blood, short wild scream, and long,	  Wheeze, cluck, swash of falling blood, short wild scream, and long,	  Wheeze, cluck, swash of falling blood, short wild scream, and long,	  Wheeze, cluck, swash of falling blood, short wild scream, and long,
      dull, tapering groan,	      dull, tapering groan,	      dull, tapering groan,	      dull, tapering groan,
  These so, these irretrievable.	  These so, these irretrievable.	  These so, these irretrievable.	  These so, these irretrievable.
			
       37	       37	       37	       37
  You laggards there on guard! look to your arms!	  You laggards there on guard! look to your arms!	  You laggards there on guard! look to your arms!	  You laggards there on guard! look to your arms!
  In at the conquer'd doors they crowd! I am possess'd!	  In at the conquer'd doors they crowd! I am possess'd!	  In at the conquer'd doors they crowd! I am possess'd!	  In at the conquer'd doors they crowd! I am possess'd!
  Embody all presences outlaw'd or suffering,	  Embody all presences outlaw'd or suffering,	  Embody all presences outlaw'd or suffering,	  Embody all presences outlaw'd or suffering,
  See myself in prison shaped like another man,	  See myself in prison shaped like another man,	  See myself in prison shaped like another man,	  See myself in prison shaped like another man,
  And feel the dull unintermitted pain.	  And feel the dull unintermitted pain.	  And feel the dull unintermitted pain.	  And feel the dull unintermitted pain.
			
  For me the keepers of convicts shoulder their carbines and keep watch,	  For me the keepers of convicts shoulder their carbines and keep watch,	  For me the keepers of convicts shoulder their carbines and keep watch,	  For me the keepers of convicts shoulder their carbines and keep watch,
  It is I let out in the morning and barr'd at night.	  It is I let out in the morning and barr'd at night.	  It is I let out in the morning and barr'd at night.	  It is I let out in the morning and barr'd at night.
			
  Not a mutineer walks handcuff'd to jail but I am handcuff'd to him	  Not a mutineer walks handcuff'd to jail but I am handcuff'd to him	  Not a mutineer walks handcuff'd to jail but I am handcuff'd to him	  Not a mutineer walks handcuff'd to jail but I am handcuff'd to him
      and walk by his side,	      and walk by his side,	      and walk by his side,	      and walk by his side,
  (I am less the jolly one there, and more the silent one with sweat	  (I am less the jolly one there, and more the silent one with sweat	  (I am less the jolly one there, and more the silent one with sweat	  (I am less the jolly one there, and more the silent one with sweat
      on my twitching lips.)	      on my twitching lips.)	      on my twitching lips.)	      on my twitching lips.)
			
  Not a youngster is taken for larceny but I go up too, and am tried	  Not a youngster is taken for larceny but I go up too, and am tried	  Not a youngster is taken for larceny but I go up too, and am tried	  Not a youngster is taken for larceny but I go up too, and am tried
      and sentenced.	      and sentenced.	      and sentenced.	      and sentenced.
			
  Not a cholera patient lies at the last gasp but I also lie at the last gasp,	  Not a cholera patient lies at the last gasp but I also lie at the last gasp,	  Not a cholera patient lies at the last gasp but I also lie at the last gasp,	  Not a cholera patient lies at the last gasp but I also lie at the last gasp,
  My face is ash-color'd, my sinews gnarl, away from me people retreat.	  My face is ash-color'd, my sinews gnarl, away from me people retreat.	  My face is ash-color'd, my sinews gnarl, away from me people retreat.	  My face is ash-color'd, my sinews gnarl, away from me people retreat.
			
  Askers embody themselves in me and I am embodied in them,	  Askers embody themselves in me and I am embodied in them,	  Askers embody themselves in me and I am embodied in them,	  Askers embody themselves in me and I am embodied in them,
  I project my hat, sit shame-faced, and beg.	  I project my hat, sit shame-faced, and beg.	  I project my hat, sit shame-faced, and beg.	  I project my hat, sit shame-faced, and beg.
			
       38	       38	       38	       38
  Enough! enough! enough!	  Enough! enough! enough!	  Enough! enough! enough!	  Enough! enough! enough!
  Somehow I have been stunn'd. Stand back!	  Somehow I have been stunn'd. Stand back!	  Somehow I have been stunn'd. Stand back!	  Somehow I have been stunn'd. Stand back!
  Give me a little time beyond my cuff'd head, slumbers, dreams, gaping,	  Give me a little time beyond my cuff'd head, slumbers, dreams, gaping,	  Give me a little time beyond my cuff'd head, slumbers, dreams, gaping,	  Give me a little time beyond my cuff'd head, slumbers, dreams, gaping,
  I discover myself on the verge of a usual mistake.	  I discover myself on the verge of a usual mistake.	  I discover myself on the verge of a usual mistake.	  I discover myself on the verge of a usual mistake.
			
  That I could forget the mockers and insults!	  That I could forget the mockers and insults!	  That I could forget the mockers and insults!	  That I could forget the mockers and insults!
  That I could forget the trickling tears and the blows of the	  That I could forget the trickling tears and the blows of the	  That I could forget the trickling tears and the blows of the	  That I could forget the trickling tears and the blows of the
      bludgeons and hammers!	      bludgeons and hammers!	      bludgeons and hammers!	      bludgeons and hammers!
  That I could look with a separate look on my own crucifixion and	  That I could look with a separate look on my own crucifixion and	  That I could look with a separate look on my own crucifixion and	  That I could look with a separate look on my own crucifixion and
      bloody crowning.	      bloody crowning.	      bloody crowning.	      bloody crowning.
			
  I remember now,	  I remember now,	  I remember now,	  I remember now,
  I resume the overstaid fraction,	  I resume the overstaid fraction,	  I resume the overstaid fraction,	  I resume the overstaid fraction,
  The grave of rock multiplies what has been confided to it, or to any graves,	  The grave of rock multiplies what has been confided to it, or to any graves,	  The grave of rock multiplies what has been confided to it, or to any graves,	  The grave of rock multiplies what has been confided to it, or to any graves,
  Corpses rise, gashes heal, fastenings roll from me.	  Corpses rise, gashes heal, fastenings roll from me.	  Corpses rise, gashes heal, fastenings roll from me.	  Corpses rise, gashes heal, fastenings roll from me.
			
  I troop forth replenish'd with supreme power, one of an average	  I troop forth replenish'd with supreme power, one of an average	  I troop forth replenish'd with supreme power, one of an average	  I troop forth replenish'd with supreme power, one of an average
      unending procession,	      unending procession,	      unending procession,	      unending procession,
  Inland and sea-coast we go, and pass all boundary lines,	  Inland and sea-coast we go, and pass all boundary lines,	  Inland and sea-coast we go, and pass all boundary lines,	  Inland and sea-coast we go, and pass all boundary lines,
  Our swift ordinances on their way over the whole earth,	  Our swift ordinances on their way over the whole earth,	  Our swift ordinances on their way over the whole earth,	  Our swift ordinances on their way over the whole earth,
  The blossoms we wear in our hats the growth of thousands of years.	  The blossoms we wear in our hats the growth of thousands of years.	  The blossoms we wear in our hats the growth of thousands of years.	  The blossoms we wear in our hats the growth of thousands of years.
			
  Eleves, I salute you! come forward!	  Eleves, I salute you! come forward!	  Eleves, I salute you! come forward!	  Eleves, I salute you! come forward!
  Continue your annotations, continue your questionings.	  Continue your annotations, continue your questionings.	  Continue your annotations, continue your questionings.	  Continue your annotations, continue your questionings.
			
       39	       39	       39	       39
  The friendly and flowing savage, who is he?	  The friendly and flowing savage, who is he?	  The friendly and flowing savage, who is he?	  The friendly and flowing savage, who is he?
  Is he waiting for civilization, or past it and mastering it?	  Is he waiting for civilization, or past it and mastering it?	  Is he waiting for civilization, or past it and mastering it?	  Is he waiting for civilization, or past it and mastering it?
			
  Is he some Southwesterner rais'd out-doors? is he Kanadian?	  Is he some Southwesterner rais'd out-doors? is he Kanadian?	  Is he some Southwesterner rais'd out-doors? is he Kanadian?	  Is he some Southwesterner rais'd out-doors? is he Kanadian?
  Is he from the Mississippi country? Iowa, Oregon, California?	  Is he from the Mississippi country? Iowa, Oregon, California?	  Is he from the Mississippi country? Iowa, Oregon, California?	  Is he from the Mississippi country? Iowa, Oregon, California?
  The mountains? prairie-life, bush-life? or sailor from the sea?	  The mountains? prairie-life, bush-life? or sailor from the sea?	  The mountains? prairie-life, bush-life? or sailor from the sea?	  The mountains? prairie-life, bush-life? or sailor from the sea?
			
  Wherever he goes men and women accept and desire him,	  Wherever he goes men and women accept and desire him,	  Wherever he goes men and women accept and desire him,	  Wherever he goes men and women accept and desire him,
  They desire he should like them, touch them, speak to them, stay with them.	  They desire he should like them, touch them, speak to them, stay with them.	  They desire he should like them, touch them, speak to them, stay with them.	  They desire he should like them, touch them, speak to them, stay with them.
			
  Behavior lawless as snow-flakes, words simple as grass, uncomb'd	  Behavior lawless as snow-flakes, words simple as grass, uncomb'd	  Behavior lawless as snow-flakes, words simple as grass, uncomb'd	  Behavior lawless as snow-flakes, words simple as grass, uncomb'd
      head, laughter, and naivete,	      head, laughter, and naivete,	      head, laughter, and naivete,	      head, laughter, and naivete,
  Slow-stepping feet, common features, common modes and emanations,	  Slow-stepping feet, common features, common modes and emanations,	  Slow-stepping feet, common features, common modes and emanations,	  Slow-stepping feet, common features, common modes and emanations,
  They descend in new forms from the tips of his fingers,	  They descend in new forms from the tips of his fingers,	  They descend in new forms from the tips of his fingers,	  They descend in new forms from the tips of his fingers,
  They are wafted with the odor of his body or breath, they fly out of	  They are wafted with the odor of his body or breath, they fly out of	  They are wafted with the odor of his body or breath, they fly out of	  They are wafted with the odor of his body or breath, they fly out of
      the glance of his eyes.	      the glance of his eyes.	      the glance of his eyes.	      the glance of his eyes.
			
       40	       40	       40	       40
  Flaunt of the sunshine I need not your bask--lie over!	  Flaunt of the sunshine I need not your bask--lie over!	  Flaunt of the sunshine I need not your bask--lie over!	  Flaunt of the sunshine I need not your bask--lie over!
  You light surfaces only, I force surfaces and depths also.	  You light surfaces only, I force surfaces and depths also.	  You light surfaces only, I force surfaces and depths also.	  You light surfaces only, I force surfaces and depths also.
			
  Earth! you seem to look for something at my hands,	  Earth! you seem to look for something at my hands,	  Earth! you seem to look for something at my hands,	  Earth! you seem to look for something at my hands,
  Say, old top-knot, what do you want?	  Say, old top-knot, what do you want?	  Say, old top-knot, what do you want?	  Say, old top-knot, what do you want?
			
  Man or woman, I might tell how I like you, but cannot,	  Man or woman, I might tell how I like you, but cannot,	  Man or woman, I might tell how I like you, but cannot,	  Man or woman, I might tell how I like you, but cannot,
  And might tell what it is in me and what it is in you, but cannot,	  And might tell what it is in me and what it is in you, but cannot,	  And might tell what it is in me and what it is in you, but cannot,	  And might tell what it is in me and what it is in you, but cannot,
  And might tell that pining I have, that pulse of my nights and days.	  And might tell that pining I have, that pulse of my nights and days.	  And might tell that pining I have, that pulse of my nights and days.	  And might tell that pining I have, that pulse of my nights and days.
			
  Behold, I do not give lectures or a little charity,	  Behold, I do not give lectures or a little charity,	  Behold, I do not give lectures or a little charity,	  Behold, I do not give lectures or a little charity,
  When I give I give myself.	  When I give I give myself.	  When I give I give myself.	  When I give I give myself.
			
  You there, impotent, loose in the knees,	  You there, impotent, loose in the knees,	  You there, impotent, loose in the knees,	  You there, impotent, loose in the knees,
  Open your scarf'd chops till I blow grit within you,	  Open your scarf'd chops till I blow grit within you,	  Open your scarf'd chops till I blow grit within you,	  Open your scarf'd chops till I blow grit within you,
  Spread your palms and lift the flaps of your pockets,	  Spread your palms and lift the flaps of your pockets,	  Spread your palms and lift the flaps of your pockets,	  Spread your palms and lift the flaps of your pockets,
  I am not to be denied, I compel, I have stores plenty and to spare,	  I am not to be denied, I compel, I have stores plenty and to spare,	  I am not to be denied, I compel, I have stores plenty and to spare,	  I am not to be denied, I compel, I have stores plenty and to spare,
  And any thing I have I bestow.	  And any thing I have I bestow.	  And any thing I have I bestow.	  And any thing I have I bestow.
			
  I do not ask who you are, that is not important to me,	  I do not ask who you are, that is not important to me,	  I do not ask who you are, that is not important to me,	  I do not ask who you are, that is not important to me,
  You can do nothing and be nothing but what I will infold you.	  You can do nothing and be nothing but what I will infold you.	  You can do nothing and be nothing but what I will infold you.	  You can do nothing and be nothing but what I will infold you.
			
  To cotton-field drudge or cleaner of privies I lean,	  To cotton-field drudge or cleaner of privies I lean,	  To cotton-field drudge or cleaner of privies I lean,	  To cotton-field drudge or cleaner of privies I lean,
  On his right cheek I put the family kiss,	  On his right cheek I put the family kiss,	  On his right cheek I put the family kiss,	  On his right cheek I put the family kiss,
  And in my soul I swear I never will deny him.	  And in my soul I swear I never will deny him.	  And in my soul I swear I never will deny him.	  And in my soul I swear I never will deny him.
			
  On women fit for conception I start bigger and nimbler babes.	  On women fit for conception I start bigger and nimbler babes.	  On women fit for conception I start bigger and nimbler babes.	  On women fit for conception I start bigger and nimbler babes.
  (This day I am jetting the stuff of far more arrogant republics.)	  (This day I am jetting the stuff of far more arrogant republics.)	  (This day I am jetting the stuff of far more arrogant republics.)	  (This day I am jetting the stuff of far more arrogant republics.)
			
  To any one dying, thither I speed and twist the knob of the door.	  To any one dying, thither I speed and twist the knob of the door.	  To any one dying, thither I speed and twist the knob of the door.	  To any one dying, thither I speed and twist the knob of the door.
  Turn the bed-clothes toward the foot of the bed,	  Turn the bed-clothes toward the foot of the bed,	  Turn the bed-clothes toward the foot of the bed,	  Turn the bed-clothes toward the foot of the bed,
  Let the physician and the priest go home.	  Let the physician and the priest go home.	  Let the physician and the priest go home.	  Let the physician and the priest go home.
			
  I seize the descending man and raise him with resistless will,	  I seize the descending man and raise him with resistless will,	  I seize the descending man and raise him with resistless will,	  I seize the descending man and raise him with resistless will,
  O despairer, here is my neck,	  O despairer, here is my neck,	  O despairer, here is my neck,	  O despairer, here is my neck,
  By God, you shall not go down! hang your whole weight upon me.	  By God, you shall not go down! hang your whole weight upon me.	  By God, you shall not go down! hang your whole weight upon me.	  By God, you shall not go down! hang your whole weight upon me.
			
  I dilate you with tremendous breath, I buoy you up,	  I dilate you with tremendous breath, I buoy you up,	  I dilate you with tremendous breath, I buoy you up,	  I dilate you with tremendous breath, I buoy you up,
  Every room of the house do I fill with an arm'd force,	  Every room of the house do I fill with an arm'd force,	  Every room of the house do I fill with an arm'd force,	  Every room of the house do I fill with an arm'd force,
  Lovers of me, bafflers of graves.	  Lovers of me, bafflers of graves.	  Lovers of me, bafflers of graves.	  Lovers of me, bafflers of graves.
			
  Sleep--I and they keep guard all night,	  Sleep--I and they keep guard all night,	  Sleep--I and they keep guard all night,	  Sleep--I and they keep guard all night,
  Not doubt, not decease shall dare to lay finger upon you,	  Not doubt, not decease shall dare to lay finger upon you,	  Not doubt, not decease shall dare to lay finger upon you,	  Not doubt, not decease shall dare to lay finger upon you,
  I have embraced you, and henceforth possess you to myself,	  I have embraced you, and henceforth possess you to myself,	  I have embraced you, and henceforth possess you to myself,	  I have embraced you, and henceforth possess you to myself,
  And when you rise in the morning you will find what I tell you is so.	  And when you rise in the morning you will find what I tell you is so.	  And when you rise in the morning you will find what I tell you is so.	  And when you rise in the morning you will find what I tell you is so.
			
       41	       41	       41	       41
  I am he bringing help for the sick as they pant on their backs,	  I am he bringing help for the sick as they pant on their backs,	  I am he bringing help for the sick as they pant on their backs,	  I am he bringing help for the sick as they pant on their backs,
  And for strong upright men I bring yet more needed help.	  And for strong upright men I bring yet more needed help.	  And for strong upright men I bring yet more needed help.	  And for strong upright men I bring yet more needed help.
			
  I heard what was said of the universe,	  I heard what was said of the universe,	  I heard what was said of the universe,	  I heard what was said of the universe,
  Heard it and heard it of several thousand years;	  Heard it and heard it of several thousand years;	  Heard it and heard it of several thousand years;	  Heard it and heard it of several thousand years;
  It is middling well as far as it goes--but is that all?	  It is middling well as far as it goes--but is that all?	  It is middling well as far as it goes--but is that all?	  It is middling well as far as it goes--but is that all?
			
  Magnifying and applying come I,	  Magnifying and applying come I,	  Magnifying and applying come I,	  Magnifying and applying come I,
  Outbidding at the start the old cautious hucksters,	  Outbidding at the start the old cautious hucksters,	  Outbidding at the start the old cautious hucksters,	  Outbidding at the start the old cautious hucksters,
  Taking myself the exact dimensions of Jehovah,	  Taking myself the exact dimensions of Jehovah,	  Taking myself the exact dimensions of Jehovah,	  Taking myself the exact dimensions of Jehovah,
  Lithographing Kronos, Zeus his son, and Hercules his grandson,	  Lithographing Kronos, Zeus his son, and Hercules his grandson,	  Lithographing Kronos, Zeus his son, and Hercules his grandson,	  Lithographing Kronos, Zeus his son, and Hercules his grandson,
  Buying drafts of Osiris, Isis, Belus, Brahma, Buddha,	  Buying drafts of Osiris, Isis, Belus, Brahma, Buddha,	  Buying drafts of Osiris, Isis, Belus, Brahma, Buddha,	  Buying drafts of Osiris, Isis, Belus, Brahma, Buddha,
  In my portfolio placing Manito loose, Allah on a leaf, the crucifix	  In my portfolio placing Manito loose, Allah on a leaf, the crucifix	  In my portfolio placing Manito loose, Allah on a leaf, the crucifix	  In my portfolio placing Manito loose, Allah on a leaf, the crucifix
      engraved,	      engraved,	      engraved,	      engraved,
  With Odin and the hideous-faced Mexitli and every idol and image,	  With Odin and the hideous-faced Mexitli and every idol and image,	  With Odin and the hideous-faced Mexitli and every idol and image,	  With Odin and the hideous-faced Mexitli and every idol and image,
  Taking them all for what they are worth and not a cent more,	  Taking them all for what they are worth and not a cent more,	  Taking them all for what they are worth and not a cent more,	  Taking them all for what they are worth and not a cent more,
  Admitting they were alive and did the work of their days,	  Admitting they were alive and did the work of their days,	  Admitting they were alive and did the work of their days,	  Admitting they were alive and did the work of their days,
  (They bore mites as for unfledg'd birds who have now to rise and fly	  (They bore mites as for unfledg'd birds who have now to rise and fly	  (They bore mites as for unfledg'd birds who have now to rise and fly	  (They bore mites as for unfledg'd birds who have now to rise and fly
      and sing for themselves,)	      and sing for themselves,)	      and sing for themselves,)	      and sing for themselves,)
  Accepting the rough deific sketches to fill out better in myself,	  Accepting the rough deific sketches to fill out better in myself,	  Accepting the rough deific sketches to fill out better in myself,	  Accepting the rough deific sketches to fill out better in myself,
      bestowing them freely on each man and woman I see,	      bestowing them freely on each man and woman I see,	      bestowing them freely on each man and woman I see,	      bestowing them freely on each man and woman I see,
  Discovering as much or more in a framer framing a house,	  Discovering as much or more in a framer framing a house,	  Discovering as much or more in a framer framing a house,	  Discovering as much or more in a framer framing a house,
  Putting higher claims for him there with his roll'd-up sleeves	  Putting higher claims for him there with his roll'd-up sleeves	  Putting higher claims for him there with his roll'd-up sleeves	  Putting higher claims for him there with his roll'd-up sleeves
      driving the mallet and chisel,	      driving the mallet and chisel,	      driving the mallet and chisel,	      driving the mallet and chisel,
  Not objecting to special revelations, considering a curl of smoke or	  Not objecting to special revelations, considering a curl of smoke or	  Not objecting to special revelations, considering a curl of smoke or	  Not objecting to special revelations, considering a curl of smoke or
      a hair on the back of my hand just as curious as any revelation,	      a hair on the back of my hand just as curious as any revelation,	      a hair on the back of my hand just as curious as any revelation,	      a hair on the back of my hand just as curious as any revelation,
  Lads ahold of fire-engines and hook-and-ladder ropes no less to me	  Lads ahold of fire-engines and hook-and-ladder ropes no less to me	  Lads ahold of fire-engines and hook-and-ladder ropes no less to me	  Lads ahold of fire-engines and hook-and-ladder ropes no less to me
      than the gods of the antique wars,	      than the gods of the antique wars,	      than the gods of the antique wars,	      than the gods of the antique wars,
  Minding their voices peal through the crash of destruction,	  Minding their voices peal through the crash of destruction,	  Minding their voices peal through the crash of destruction,	  Minding their voices peal through the crash of destruction,
  Their brawny limbs passing safe over charr'd laths, their white	  Their brawny limbs passing safe over charr'd laths, their white	  Their brawny limbs passing safe over charr'd laths, their white	  Their brawny limbs passing safe over charr'd laths, their white
      foreheads whole and unhurt out of the flames;	      foreheads whole and unhurt out of the flames;	      foreheads whole and unhurt out of the flames;	      foreheads whole and unhurt out of the flames;
  By the mechanic's wife with her babe at her nipple interceding for	  By the mechanic's wife with her babe at her nipple interceding for	  By the mechanic's wife with her babe at her nipple interceding for	  By the mechanic's wife with her babe at her nipple interceding for
      every person born,	      every person born,	      every person born,	      every person born,
  Three scythes at harvest whizzing in a row from three lusty angels	  Three scythes at harvest whizzing in a row from three lusty angels	  Three scythes at harvest whizzing in a row from three lusty angels	  Three scythes at harvest whizzing in a row from three lusty angels
      with shirts bagg'd out at their waists,	      with shirts bagg'd out at their waists,	      with shirts bagg'd out at their waists,	      with shirts bagg'd out at their waists,
  The snag-tooth'd hostler with red hair redeeming sins past and to come,	  The snag-tooth'd hostler with red hair redeeming sins past and to come,	  The snag-tooth'd hostler with red hair redeeming sins past and to come,	  The snag-tooth'd hostler with red hair redeeming sins past and to come,
  Selling all he possesses, traveling on foot to fee lawyers for his	  Selling all he possesses, traveling on foot to fee lawyers for his	  Selling all he possesses, traveling on foot to fee lawyers for his	  Selling all he possesses, traveling on foot to fee lawyers for his
      brother and sit by him while he is tried for forgery;	      brother and sit by him while he is tried for forgery;	      brother and sit by him while he is tried for forgery;	      brother and sit by him while he is tried for forgery;
  What was strewn in the amplest strewing the square rod about me, and	  What was strewn in the amplest strewing the square rod about me, and	  What was strewn in the amplest strewing the square rod about me, and	  What was strewn in the amplest strewing the square rod about me, and
      not filling the square rod then,	      not filling the square rod then,	      not filling the square rod then,	      not filling the square rod then,
  The bull and the bug never worshipp'd half enough,	  The bull and the bug never worshipp'd half enough,	  The bull and the bug never worshipp'd half enough,	  The bull and the bug never worshipp'd half enough,
  Dung and dirt more admirable than was dream'd,	  Dung and dirt more admirable than was dream'd,	  Dung and dirt more admirable than was dream'd,	  Dung and dirt more admirable than was dream'd,
  The supernatural of no account, myself waiting my time to be one of	  The supernatural of no account, myself waiting my time to be one of	  The supernatural of no account, myself waiting my time to be one of	  The supernatural of no account, myself waiting my time to be one of
      the supremes,	      the supremes,	      the supremes,	      the supremes,
  The day getting ready for me when I shall do as much good as the	  The day getting ready for me when I shall do as much good as the	  The day getting ready for me when I shall do as much good as the	  The day getting ready for me when I shall do as much good as the
      best, and be as prodigious;	      best, and be as prodigious;	      best, and be as prodigious;	      best, and be as prodigious;
  By my life-lumps! becoming already a creator,	  By my life-lumps! becoming already a creator,	  By my life-lumps! becoming already a creator,	  By my life-lumps! becoming already a creator,
  Putting myself here and now to the ambush'd womb of the shadows.	  Putting myself here and now to the ambush'd womb of the shadows.	  Putting myself here and now to the ambush'd womb of the shadows.	  Putting myself here and now to the ambush'd womb of the shadows.
			
			
      42	      42	      42	      42
  A call in the midst of the crowd,	  A call in the midst of the crowd,	  A call in the midst of the crowd,	  A call in the midst of the crowd,
  My own voice, orotund sweeping and final.	  My own voice, orotund sweeping and final.	  My own voice, orotund sweeping and final.	  My own voice, orotund sweeping and final.
			
  Come my children,	  Come my children,	  Come my children,	  Come my children,
  Come my boys and girls, my women, household and intimates,	  Come my boys and girls, my women, household and intimates,	  Come my boys and girls, my women, household and intimates,	  Come my boys and girls, my women, household and intimates,
  Now the performer launches his nerve, he has pass'd his prelude on	  Now the performer launches his nerve, he has pass'd his prelude on	  Now the performer launches his nerve, he has pass'd his prelude on	  Now the performer launches his nerve, he has pass'd his prelude on
      the reeds within.	      the reeds within.	      the reeds within.	      the reeds within.
			
  Easily written loose-finger'd chords--I feel the thrum of your	  Easily written loose-finger'd chords--I feel the thrum of your	  Easily written loose-finger'd chords--I feel the thrum of your	  Easily written loose-finger'd chords--I feel the thrum of your
      climax and close.	      climax and close.	      climax and close.	      climax and close.
			
  My head slues round on my neck,	  My head slues round on my neck,	  My head slues round on my neck,	  My head slues round on my neck,
  Music rolls, but not from the organ,	  Music rolls, but not from the organ,	  Music rolls, but not from the organ,	  Music rolls, but not from the organ,
  Folks are around me, but they are no household of mine.	  Folks are around me, but they are no household of mine.	  Folks are around me, but they are no household of mine.	  Folks are around me, but they are no household of mine.
			
  Ever the hard unsunk ground,	  Ever the hard unsunk ground,	  Ever the hard unsunk ground,	  Ever the hard unsunk ground,
  Ever the eaters and drinkers, ever the upward and downward sun, ever	  Ever the eaters and drinkers, ever the upward and downward sun, ever	  Ever the eaters and drinkers, ever the upward and downward sun, ever	  Ever the eaters and drinkers, ever the upward and downward sun, ever
      the air and the ceaseless tides,	      the air and the ceaseless tides,	      the air and the ceaseless tides,	      the air and the ceaseless tides,
  Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing, wicked, real,	  Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing, wicked, real,	  Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing, wicked, real,	  Ever myself and my neighbors, refreshing, wicked, real,
  Ever the old inexplicable query, ever that thorn'd thumb, that	  Ever the old inexplicable query, ever that thorn'd thumb, that	  Ever the old inexplicable query, ever that thorn'd thumb, that	  Ever the old inexplicable query, ever that thorn'd thumb, that
      breath of itches and thirsts,	      breath of itches and thirsts,	      breath of itches and thirsts,	      breath of itches and thirsts,
  Ever the vexer's hoot! hoot! till we find where the sly one hides	  Ever the vexer's hoot! hoot! till we find where the sly one hides	  Ever the vexer's hoot! hoot! till we find where the sly one hides	  Ever the vexer's hoot! hoot! till we find where the sly one hides
      and bring him forth,	      and bring him forth,	      and bring him forth,	      and bring him forth,
  Ever love, ever the sobbing liquid of life,	  Ever love, ever the sobbing liquid of life,	  Ever love, ever the sobbing liquid of life,	  Ever love, ever the sobbing liquid of life,
  Ever the bandage under the chin, ever the trestles of death.	  Ever the bandage under the chin, ever the trestles of death.	  Ever the bandage under the chin, ever the trestles of death.	  Ever the bandage under the chin, ever the trestles of death.
			
  Here and there with dimes on the eyes walking,	  Here and there with dimes on the eyes walking,	  Here and there with dimes on the eyes walking,	  Here and there with dimes on the eyes walking,
  To feed the greed of the belly the brains liberally spooning,	  To feed the greed of the belly the brains liberally spooning,	  To feed the greed of the belly the brains liberally spooning,	  To feed the greed of the belly the brains liberally spooning,
  Tickets buying, taking, selling, but in to the feast never once going,	  Tickets buying, taking, selling, but in to the feast never once going,	  Tickets buying, taking, selling, but in to the feast never once going,	  Tickets buying, taking, selling, but in to the feast never once going,
  Many sweating, ploughing, thrashing, and then the chaff for payment	  Many sweating, ploughing, thrashing, and then the chaff for payment	  Many sweating, ploughing, thrashing, and then the chaff for payment	  Many sweating, ploughing, thrashing, and then the chaff for payment
      receiving,	      receiving,	      receiving,	      receiving,
  A few idly owning, and they the wheat continually claiming.	  A few idly owning, and they the wheat continually claiming.	  A few idly owning, and they the wheat continually claiming.	  A few idly owning, and they the wheat continually claiming.
			
  This is the city and I am one of the citizens,	  This is the city and I am one of the citizens,	  This is the city and I am one of the citizens,	  This is the city and I am one of the citizens,
  Whatever interests the rest interests me, politics, wars, markets,	  Whatever interests the rest interests me, politics, wars, markets,	  Whatever interests the rest interests me, politics, wars, markets,	  Whatever interests the rest interests me, politics, wars, markets,
      newspapers, schools,	      newspapers, schools,	      newspapers, schools,	      newspapers, schools,
  The mayor and councils, banks, tariffs, steamships, factories,	  The mayor and councils, banks, tariffs, steamships, factories,	  The mayor and councils, banks, tariffs, steamships, factories,	  The mayor and councils, banks, tariffs, steamships, factories,
      stocks, stores, real estate and personal estate.	      stocks, stores, real estate and personal estate.	      stocks, stores, real estate and personal estate.	      stocks, stores, real estate and personal estate.
			
  The little plentiful manikins skipping around in collars and tail'd coats	  The little plentiful manikins skipping around in collars and tail'd coats	  The little plentiful manikins skipping around in collars and tail'd coats	  The little plentiful manikins skipping around in collars and tail'd coats
  I am aware who they are, (they are positively not worms or fleas,)	  I am aware who they are, (they are positively not worms or fleas,)	  I am aware who they are, (they are positively not worms or fleas,)	  I am aware who they are, (they are positively not worms or fleas,)
  I acknowledge the duplicates of myself, the weakest and shallowest	  I acknowledge the duplicates of myself, the weakest and shallowest	  I acknowledge the duplicates of myself, the weakest and shallowest	  I acknowledge the duplicates of myself, the weakest and shallowest
      is deathless with me,	      is deathless with me,	      is deathless with me,	      is deathless with me,
  What I do and say the same waits for them,	  What I do and say the same waits for them,	  What I do and say the same waits for them,	  What I do and say the same waits for them,
  Every thought that flounders in me the same flounders in them.	  Every thought that flounders in me the same flounders in them.	  Every thought that flounders in me the same flounders in them.	  Every thought that flounders in me the same flounders in them.
			
  I know perfectly well my own egotism,	  I know perfectly well my own egotism,	  I know perfectly well my own egotism,	  I know perfectly well my own egotism,
  Know my omnivorous lines and must not write any less,	  Know my omnivorous lines and must not write any less,	  Know my omnivorous lines and must not write any less,	  Know my omnivorous lines and must not write any less,
  And would fetch you whoever you are flush with myself.	  And would fetch you whoever you are flush with myself.	  And would fetch you whoever you are flush with myself.	  And would fetch you whoever you are flush with myself.
			
  Not words of routine this song of mine,	  Not words of routine this song of mine,	  Not words of routine this song of mine,	  Not words of routine this song of mine,
  But abruptly to question, to leap beyond yet nearer bring;	  But abruptly to question, to leap beyond yet nearer bring;	  But abruptly to question, to leap beyond yet nearer bring;	  But abruptly to question, to leap beyond yet nearer bring;
  This printed and bound book--but the printer and the	  This printed and bound book--but the printer and the	  This printed and bound book--but the printer and the	  This printed and bound book--but the printer and the
      printing-office boy?	      printing-office boy?	      printing-office boy?	      printing-office boy?
  The well-taken photographs--but your wife or friend close and solid	  The well-taken photographs--but your wife or friend close and solid	  The well-taken photographs--but your wife or friend close and solid	  The well-taken photographs--but your wife or friend close and solid
      in your arms?	      in your arms?	      in your arms?	      in your arms?
  The black ship mail'd with iron, her mighty guns in her turrets--but	  The black ship mail'd with iron, her mighty guns in her turrets--but	  The black ship mail'd with iron, her mighty guns in her turrets--but	  The black ship mail'd with iron, her mighty guns in her turrets--but
      the pluck of the captain and engineers?	      the pluck of the captain and engineers?	      the pluck of the captain and engineers?	      the pluck of the captain and engineers?
  In the houses the dishes and fare and furniture--but the host and	  In the houses the dishes and fare and furniture--but the host and	  In the houses the dishes and fare and furniture--but the host and	  In the houses the dishes and fare and furniture--but the host and
      hostess, and the look out of their eyes?	      hostess, and the look out of their eyes?	      hostess, and the look out of their eyes?	      hostess, and the look out of their eyes?
  The sky up there--yet here or next door, or across the way?	  The sky up there--yet here or next door, or across the way?	  The sky up there--yet here or next door, or across the way?	  The sky up there--yet here or next door, or across the way?
  The saints and sages in history--but you yourself?	  The saints and sages in history--but you yourself?	  The saints and sages in history--but you yourself?	  The saints and sages in history--but you yourself?
  Sermons, creeds, theology--but the fathomless human brain,	  Sermons, creeds, theology--but the fathomless human brain,	  Sermons, creeds, theology--but the fathomless human brain,	  Sermons, creeds, theology--but the fathomless human brain,
  And what is reason? and what is love? and what is life?	  And what is reason? and what is love? and what is life?	  And what is reason? and what is love? and what is life?	  And what is reason? and what is love? and what is life?
			
       43	       43	       43	       43
  I do not despise you priests, all time, the world over,	  I do not despise you priests, all time, the world over,	  I do not despise you priests, all time, the world over,	  I do not despise you priests, all time, the world over,
  My faith is the greatest of faiths and the least of faiths,	  My faith is the greatest of faiths and the least of faiths,	  My faith is the greatest of faiths and the least of faiths,	  My faith is the greatest of faiths and the least of faiths,
  Enclosing worship ancient and modern and all between ancient and modern,	  Enclosing worship ancient and modern and all between ancient and modern,	  Enclosing worship ancient and modern and all between ancient and modern,	  Enclosing worship ancient and modern and all between ancient and modern,
  Believing I shall come again upon the earth after five thousand years,	  Believing I shall come again upon the earth after five thousand years,	  Believing I shall come again upon the earth after five thousand years,	  Believing I shall come again upon the earth after five thousand years,
  Waiting responses from oracles, honoring the gods, saluting the sun,	  Waiting responses from oracles, honoring the gods, saluting the sun,	  Waiting responses from oracles, honoring the gods, saluting the sun,	  Waiting responses from oracles, honoring the gods, saluting the sun,
  Making a fetich of the first rock or stump, powowing with sticks in	  Making a fetich of the first rock or stump, powowing with sticks in	  Making a fetich of the first rock or stump, powowing with sticks in	  Making a fetich of the first rock or stump, powowing with sticks in
      the circle of obis,	      the circle of obis,	      the circle of obis,	      the circle of obis,
  Helping the llama or brahmin as he trims the lamps of the idols,	  Helping the llama or brahmin as he trims the lamps of the idols,	  Helping the llama or brahmin as he trims the lamps of the idols,	  Helping the llama or brahmin as he trims the lamps of the idols,
  Dancing yet through the streets in a phallic procession, rapt and	  Dancing yet through the streets in a phallic procession, rapt and	  Dancing yet through the streets in a phallic procession, rapt and	  Dancing yet through the streets in a phallic procession, rapt and
      austere in the woods a gymnosophist,	      austere in the woods a gymnosophist,	      austere in the woods a gymnosophist,	      austere in the woods a gymnosophist,
  Drinking mead from the skull-cap, to Shastas and Vedas admirant,	  Drinking mead from the skull-cap, to Shastas and Vedas admirant,	  Drinking mead from the skull-cap, to Shastas and Vedas admirant,	  Drinking mead from the skull-cap, to Shastas and Vedas admirant,
      minding the Koran,	      minding the Koran,	      minding the Koran,	      minding the Koran,
  Walking the teokallis, spotted with gore from the stone and knife,	  Walking the teokallis, spotted with gore from the stone and knife,	  Walking the teokallis, spotted with gore from the stone and knife,	  Walking the teokallis, spotted with gore from the stone and knife,
      beating the serpent-skin drum,	      beating the serpent-skin drum,	      beating the serpent-skin drum,	      beating the serpent-skin drum,
  Accepting the Gospels, accepting him that was crucified, knowing	  Accepting the Gospels, accepting him that was crucified, knowing	  Accepting the Gospels, accepting him that was crucified, knowing	  Accepting the Gospels, accepting him that was crucified, knowing
      assuredly that he is divine,	      assuredly that he is divine,	      assuredly that he is divine,	      assuredly that he is divine,
  To the mass kneeling or the puritan's prayer rising, or sitting	  To the mass kneeling or the puritan's prayer rising, or sitting	  To the mass kneeling or the puritan's prayer rising, or sitting	  To the mass kneeling or the puritan's prayer rising, or sitting
      patiently in a pew,	      patiently in a pew,	      patiently in a pew,	      patiently in a pew,
  Ranting and frothing in my insane crisis, or waiting dead-like till	  Ranting and frothing in my insane crisis, or waiting dead-like till	  Ranting and frothing in my insane crisis, or waiting dead-like till	  Ranting and frothing in my insane crisis, or waiting dead-like till
      my spirit arouses me,	      my spirit arouses me,	      my spirit arouses me,	      my spirit arouses me,
  Looking forth on pavement and land, or outside of pavement and land,	  Looking forth on pavement and land, or outside of pavement and land,	  Looking forth on pavement and land, or outside of pavement and land,	  Looking forth on pavement and land, or outside of pavement and land,
  Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits.	  Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits.	  Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits.	  Belonging to the winders of the circuit of circuits.
			
  One of that centripetal and centrifugal gang I turn and talk like	  One of that centripetal and centrifugal gang I turn and talk like	  One of that centripetal and centrifugal gang I turn and talk like	  One of that centripetal and centrifugal gang I turn and talk like
      man leaving charges before a journey.	      man leaving charges before a journey.	      man leaving charges before a journey.	      man leaving charges before a journey.
			
  Down-hearted doubters dull and excluded,	  Down-hearted doubters dull and excluded,	  Down-hearted doubters dull and excluded,	  Down-hearted doubters dull and excluded,
  Frivolous, sullen, moping, angry, affected, dishearten'd, atheistical,	  Frivolous, sullen, moping, angry, affected, dishearten'd, atheistical,	  Frivolous, sullen, moping, angry, affected, dishearten'd, atheistical,	  Frivolous, sullen, moping, angry, affected, dishearten'd, atheistical,
  I know every one of you, I know the sea of torment, doubt, despair	  I know every one of you, I know the sea of torment, doubt, despair	  I know every one of you, I know the sea of torment, doubt, despair	  I know every one of you, I know the sea of torment, doubt, despair
      and unbelief.	      and unbelief.	      and unbelief.	      and unbelief.
			
  How the flukes splash!	  How the flukes splash!	  How the flukes splash!	  How the flukes splash!
  How they contort rapid as lightning, with spasms and spouts of blood!	  How they contort rapid as lightning, with spasms and spouts of blood!	  How they contort rapid as lightning, with spasms and spouts of blood!	  How they contort rapid as lightning, with spasms and spouts of blood!
			
  Be at peace bloody flukes of doubters and sullen mopers,	  Be at peace bloody flukes of doubters and sullen mopers,	  Be at peace bloody flukes of doubters and sullen mopers,	  Be at peace bloody flukes of doubters and sullen mopers,
  I take my place among you as much as among any,	  I take my place among you as much as among any,	  I take my place among you as much as among any,	  I take my place among you as much as among any,
  The past is the push of you, me, all, precisely the same,	  The past is the push of you, me, all, precisely the same,	  The past is the push of you, me, all, precisely the same,	  The past is the push of you, me, all, precisely the same,
  And what is yet untried and afterward is for you, me, all, precisely	  And what is yet untried and afterward is for you, me, all, precisely	  And what is yet untried and afterward is for you, me, all, precisely	  And what is yet untried and afterward is for you, me, all, precisely
      the same.	      the same.	      the same.	      the same.
			
  I do not know what is untried and afterward,	  I do not know what is untried and afterward,	  I do not know what is untried and afterward,	  I do not know what is untried and afterward,
  But I know it will in its turn prove sufficient, and cannot fail.	  But I know it will in its turn prove sufficient, and cannot fail.	  But I know it will in its turn prove sufficient, and cannot fail.	  But I know it will in its turn prove sufficient, and cannot fail.
			
  Each who passes is consider'd, each who stops is consider'd, not	  Each who passes is consider'd, each who stops is consider'd, not	  Each who passes is consider'd, each who stops is consider'd, not	  Each who passes is consider'd, each who stops is consider'd, not
      single one can it fall.	      single one can it fall.	      single one can it fall.	      single one can it fall.
			
  It cannot fall the young man who died and was buried,	  It cannot fall the young man who died and was buried,	  It cannot fall the young man who died and was buried,	  It cannot fall the young man who died and was buried,
  Nor the young woman who died and was put by his side,	  Nor the young woman who died and was put by his side,	  Nor the young woman who died and was put by his side,	  Nor the young woman who died and was put by his side,
  Nor the little child that peep'd in at the door, and then drew back	  Nor the little child that peep'd in at the door, and then drew back	  Nor the little child that peep'd in at the door, and then drew back	  Nor the little child that peep'd in at the door, and then drew back
      and was never seen again,	      and was never seen again,	      and was never seen again,	      and was never seen again,
  Nor the old man who has lived without purpose, and feels it with	  Nor the old man who has lived without purpose, and feels it with	  Nor the old man who has lived without purpose, and feels it with	  Nor the old man who has lived without purpose, and feels it with
      bitterness worse than gall,	      bitterness worse than gall,	      bitterness worse than gall,	      bitterness worse than gall,
  Nor him in the poor house tubercled by rum and the bad disorder,	  Nor him in the poor house tubercled by rum and the bad disorder,	  Nor him in the poor house tubercled by rum and the bad disorder,	  Nor him in the poor house tubercled by rum and the bad disorder,
  Nor the numberless slaughter'd and wreck'd, nor the brutish koboo	  Nor the numberless slaughter'd and wreck'd, nor the brutish koboo	  Nor the numberless slaughter'd and wreck'd, nor the brutish koboo	  Nor the numberless slaughter'd and wreck'd, nor the brutish koboo
      call'd the ordure of humanity,	      call'd the ordure of humanity,	      call'd the ordure of humanity,	      call'd the ordure of humanity,
  Nor the sacs merely floating with open mouths for food to slip in,	  Nor the sacs merely floating with open mouths for food to slip in,	  Nor the sacs merely floating with open mouths for food to slip in,	  Nor the sacs merely floating with open mouths for food to slip in,
  Nor any thing in the earth, or down in the oldest graves of the earth,	  Nor any thing in the earth, or down in the oldest graves of the earth,	  Nor any thing in the earth, or down in the oldest graves of the earth,	  Nor any thing in the earth, or down in the oldest graves of the earth,
  Nor any thing in the myriads of spheres, nor the myriads of myriads	  Nor any thing in the myriads of spheres, nor the myriads of myriads	  Nor any thing in the myriads of spheres, nor the myriads of myriads	  Nor any thing in the myriads of spheres, nor the myriads of myriads
      that inhabit them,	      that inhabit them,	      that inhabit them,	      that inhabit them,
  Nor the present, nor the least wisp that is known.	  Nor the present, nor the least wisp that is known.	  Nor the present, nor the least wisp that is known.	  Nor the present, nor the least wisp that is known.
			
       44	       44	       44	       44
  It is time to explain myself--let us stand up.	  It is time to explain myself--let us stand up.	  It is time to explain myself--let us stand up.	  It is time to explain myself--let us stand up.
			
  What is known I strip away,	  What is known I strip away,	  What is known I strip away,	  What is known I strip away,
  I launch all men and women forward with me into the Unknown.	  I launch all men and women forward with me into the Unknown.	  I launch all men and women forward with me into the Unknown.	  I launch all men and women forward with me into the Unknown.
			
  The clock indicates the moment--but what does eternity indicate?	  The clock indicates the moment--but what does eternity indicate?	  The clock indicates the moment--but what does eternity indicate?	  The clock indicates the moment--but what does eternity indicate?
			
  We have thus far exhausted trillions of winters and summers,	  We have thus far exhausted trillions of winters and summers,	  We have thus far exhausted trillions of winters and summers,	  We have thus far exhausted trillions of winters and summers,
  There are trillions ahead, and trillions ahead of them.	  There are trillions ahead, and trillions ahead of them.	  There are trillions ahead, and trillions ahead of them.	  There are trillions ahead, and trillions ahead of them.
			
  Births have brought us richness and variety,	  Births have brought us richness and variety,	  Births have brought us richness and variety,	  Births have brought us richness and variety,
  And other births will bring us richness and variety.	  And other births will bring us richness and variety.	  And other births will bring us richness and variety.	  And other births will bring us richness and variety.
			
  I do not call one greater and one smaller,	  I do not call one greater and one smaller,	  I do not call one greater and one smaller,	  I do not call one greater and one smaller,
  That which fills its period and place is equal to any.	  That which fills its period and place is equal to any.	  That which fills its period and place is equal to any.	  That which fills its period and place is equal to any.
			
  Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you, my brother, my sister?	  Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you, my brother, my sister?	  Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you, my brother, my sister?	  Were mankind murderous or jealous upon you, my brother, my sister?
  I am sorry for you, they are not murderous or jealous upon me,	  I am sorry for you, they are not murderous or jealous upon me,	  I am sorry for you, they are not murderous or jealous upon me,	  I am sorry for you, they are not murderous or jealous upon me,
  All has been gentle with me, I keep no account with lamentation,	  All has been gentle with me, I keep no account with lamentation,	  All has been gentle with me, I keep no account with lamentation,	  All has been gentle with me, I keep no account with lamentation,
  (What have I to do with lamentation?)	  (What have I to do with lamentation?)	  (What have I to do with lamentation?)	  (What have I to do with lamentation?)
			
  I am an acme of things accomplish'd, and I an encloser of things to be.	  I am an acme of things accomplish'd, and I an encloser of things to be.	  I am an acme of things accomplish'd, and I an encloser of things to be.	  I am an acme of things accomplish'd, and I an encloser of things to be.
			
  My feet strike an apex of the apices of the stairs,	  My feet strike an apex of the apices of the stairs,	  My feet strike an apex of the apices of the stairs,	  My feet strike an apex of the apices of the stairs,
  On every step bunches of ages, and larger bunches between the steps,	  On every step bunches of ages, and larger bunches between the steps,	  On every step bunches of ages, and larger bunches between the steps,	  On every step bunches of ages, and larger bunches between the steps,
  All below duly travel'd, and still I mount and mount.	  All below duly travel'd, and still I mount and mount.	  All below duly travel'd, and still I mount and mount.	  All below duly travel'd, and still I mount and mount.
			
  Rise after rise bow the phantoms behind me,	  Rise after rise bow the phantoms behind me,	  Rise after rise bow the phantoms behind me,	  Rise after rise bow the phantoms behind me,
  Afar down I see the huge first Nothing, I know I was even there,	  Afar down I see the huge first Nothing, I know I was even there,	  Afar down I see the huge first Nothing, I know I was even there,	  Afar down I see the huge first Nothing, I know I was even there,
  I waited unseen and always, and slept through the lethargic mist,	  I waited unseen and always, and slept through the lethargic mist,	  I waited unseen and always, and slept through the lethargic mist,	  I waited unseen and always, and slept through the lethargic mist,
  And took my time, and took no hurt from the fetid carbon.	  And took my time, and took no hurt from the fetid carbon.	  And took my time, and took no hurt from the fetid carbon.	  And took my time, and took no hurt from the fetid carbon.
			
  Long I was hugg'd close--long and long.	  Long I was hugg'd close--long and long.	  Long I was hugg'd close--long and long.	  Long I was hugg'd close--long and long.
			
  Immense have been the preparations for me,	  Immense have been the preparations for me,	  Immense have been the preparations for me,	  Immense have been the preparations for me,
  Faithful and friendly the arms that have help'd me.	  Faithful and friendly the arms that have help'd me.	  Faithful and friendly the arms that have help'd me.	  Faithful and friendly the arms that have help'd me.
			
  Cycles ferried my cradle, rowing and rowing like cheerful boatmen,	  Cycles ferried my cradle, rowing and rowing like cheerful boatmen,	  Cycles ferried my cradle, rowing and rowing like cheerful boatmen,	  Cycles ferried my cradle, rowing and rowing like cheerful boatmen,
  For room to me stars kept aside in their own rings,	  For room to me stars kept aside in their own rings,	  For room to me stars kept aside in their own rings,	  For room to me stars kept aside in their own rings,
  They sent influences to look after what was to hold me.	  They sent influences to look after what was to hold me.	  They sent influences to look after what was to hold me.	  They sent influences to look after what was to hold me.
			
  Before I was born out of my mother generations guided me,	  Before I was born out of my mother generations guided me,	  Before I was born out of my mother generations guided me,	  Before I was born out of my mother generations guided me,
  My embryo has never been torpid, nothing could overlay it.	  My embryo has never been torpid, nothing could overlay it.	  My embryo has never been torpid, nothing could overlay it.	  My embryo has never been torpid, nothing could overlay it.
			
  For it the nebula cohered to an orb,	  For it the nebula cohered to an orb,	  For it the nebula cohered to an orb,	  For it the nebula cohered to an orb,
  The long slow strata piled to rest it on,	  The long slow strata piled to rest it on,	  The long slow strata piled to rest it on,	  The long slow strata piled to rest it on,
  Vast vegetables gave it sustenance,	  Vast vegetables gave it sustenance,	  Vast vegetables gave it sustenance,	  Vast vegetables gave it sustenance,
  Monstrous sauroids transported it in their mouths and deposited it	  Monstrous sauroids transported it in their mouths and deposited it	  Monstrous sauroids transported it in their mouths and deposited it	  Monstrous sauroids transported it in their mouths and deposited it
      with care.	      with care.	      with care.	      with care.
			
  All forces have been steadily employ'd to complete and delight me,	  All forces have been steadily employ'd to complete and delight me,	  All forces have been steadily employ'd to complete and delight me,	  All forces have been steadily employ'd to complete and delight me,
  Now on this spot I stand with my robust soul.	  Now on this spot I stand with my robust soul.	  Now on this spot I stand with my robust soul.	  Now on this spot I stand with my robust soul.
			
			
      45	      45	      45	      45
  O span of youth! ever-push'd elasticity!	  O span of youth! ever-push'd elasticity!	  O span of youth! ever-push'd elasticity!	  O span of youth! ever-push'd elasticity!
  O manhood, balanced, florid and full.	  O manhood, balanced, florid and full.	  O manhood, balanced, florid and full.	  O manhood, balanced, florid and full.
			
  My lovers suffocate me,	  My lovers suffocate me,	  My lovers suffocate me,	  My lovers suffocate me,
  Crowding my lips, thick in the pores of my skin,	  Crowding my lips, thick in the pores of my skin,	  Crowding my lips, thick in the pores of my skin,	  Crowding my lips, thick in the pores of my skin,
  Jostling me through streets and public halls, coming naked to me at night,	  Jostling me through streets and public halls, coming naked to me at night,	  Jostling me through streets and public halls, coming naked to me at night,	  Jostling me through streets and public halls, coming naked to me at night,
  Crying by day, Ahoy! from the rocks of the river, swinging and	  Crying by day, Ahoy! from the rocks of the river, swinging and	  Crying by day, Ahoy! from the rocks of the river, swinging and	  Crying by day, Ahoy! from the rocks of the river, swinging and
      chirping over my head,	      chirping over my head,	      chirping over my head,	      chirping over my head,
  Calling my name from flower-beds, vines, tangled underbrush,	  Calling my name from flower-beds, vines, tangled underbrush,	  Calling my name from flower-beds, vines, tangled underbrush,	  Calling my name from flower-beds, vines, tangled underbrush,
  Lighting on every moment of my life,	  Lighting on every moment of my life,	  Lighting on every moment of my life,	  Lighting on every moment of my life,
  Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses,	  Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses,	  Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses,	  Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses,
  Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts and giving them to be mine.	  Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts and giving them to be mine.	  Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts and giving them to be mine.	  Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts and giving them to be mine.
			
  Old age superbly rising! O welcome, ineffable grace of dying days!	  Old age superbly rising! O welcome, ineffable grace of dying days!	  Old age superbly rising! O welcome, ineffable grace of dying days!	  Old age superbly rising! O welcome, ineffable grace of dying days!
			
  Every condition promulges not only itself, it promulges what grows	  Every condition promulges not only itself, it promulges what grows	  Every condition promulges not only itself, it promulges what grows	  Every condition promulges not only itself, it promulges what grows
      after and out of itself,	      after and out of itself,	      after and out of itself,	      after and out of itself,
  And the dark hush promulges as much as any.	  And the dark hush promulges as much as any.	  And the dark hush promulges as much as any.	  And the dark hush promulges as much as any.
			
  I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled systems,	  I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled systems,	  I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled systems,	  I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled systems,
  And all I see multiplied as high as I can cipher edge but the rim of	  And all I see multiplied as high as I can cipher edge but the rim of	  And all I see multiplied as high as I can cipher edge but the rim of	  And all I see multiplied as high as I can cipher edge but the rim of
      the farther systems.	      the farther systems.	      the farther systems.	      the farther systems.
			
  Wider and wider they spread, expanding, always expanding,	  Wider and wider they spread, expanding, always expanding,	  Wider and wider they spread, expanding, always expanding,	  Wider and wider they spread, expanding, always expanding,
  Outward and outward and forever outward.	  Outward and outward and forever outward.	  Outward and outward and forever outward.	  Outward and outward and forever outward.
			
  My sun has his sun and round him obediently wheels,	  My sun has his sun and round him obediently wheels,	  My sun has his sun and round him obediently wheels,	  My sun has his sun and round him obediently wheels,
  He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit,	  He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit,	  He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit,	  He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit,
  And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest inside them.	  And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest inside them.	  And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest inside them.	  And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest inside them.
			
  There is no stoppage and never can be stoppage,	  There is no stoppage and never can be stoppage,	  There is no stoppage and never can be stoppage,	  There is no stoppage and never can be stoppage,
  If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon their surfaces,	  If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon their surfaces,	  If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon their surfaces,	  If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon their surfaces,
      were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would	      were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would	      were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would	      were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would
      not avail the long run,	      not avail the long run,	      not avail the long run,	      not avail the long run,
  We should surely bring up again where we now stand,	  We should surely bring up again where we now stand,	  We should surely bring up again where we now stand,	  We should surely bring up again where we now stand,
  And surely go as much farther, and then farther and farther.	  And surely go as much farther, and then farther and farther.	  And surely go as much farther, and then farther and farther.	  And surely go as much farther, and then farther and farther.
			
  A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic leagues, do	  A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic leagues, do	  A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic leagues, do	  A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic leagues, do
      not hazard the span or make it impatient,	      not hazard the span or make it impatient,	      not hazard the span or make it impatient,	      not hazard the span or make it impatient,
  They are but parts, any thing is but a part.	  They are but parts, any thing is but a part.	  They are but parts, any thing is but a part.	  They are but parts, any thing is but a part.
			
  See ever so far, there is limitless space outside of that,	  See ever so far, there is limitless space outside of that,	  See ever so far, there is limitless space outside of that,	  See ever so far, there is limitless space outside of that,
  Count ever so much, there is limitless time around that.	  Count ever so much, there is limitless time around that.	  Count ever so much, there is limitless time around that.	  Count ever so much, there is limitless time around that.
			
  My rendezvous is appointed, it is certain,	  My rendezvous is appointed, it is certain,	  My rendezvous is appointed, it is certain,	  My rendezvous is appointed, it is certain,
  The Lord will be there and wait till I come on perfect terms,	  The Lord will be there and wait till I come on perfect terms,	  The Lord will be there and wait till I come on perfect terms,	  The Lord will be there and wait till I come on perfect terms,
  The great Camerado, the lover true for whom I pine will be there.	  The great Camerado, the lover true for whom I pine will be there.	  The great Camerado, the lover true for whom I pine will be there.	  The great Camerado, the lover true for whom I pine will be there.
			
       46	       46	       46	       46
  I know I have the best of time and space, and was never measured and	  I know I have the best of time and space, and was never measured and	  I know I have the best of time and space, and was never measured and	  I know I have the best of time and space, and was never measured and
      never will be measured.	      never will be measured.	      never will be measured.	      never will be measured.
			
  I tramp a perpetual journey, (come listen all!)	  I tramp a perpetual journey, (come listen all!)	  I tramp a perpetual journey, (come listen all!)	  I tramp a perpetual journey, (come listen all!)
  My signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff cut from the woods,	  My signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff cut from the woods,	  My signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff cut from the woods,	  My signs are a rain-proof coat, good shoes, and a staff cut from the woods,
  No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair,	  No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair,	  No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair,	  No friend of mine takes his ease in my chair,
  I have no chair, no church, no philosophy,	  I have no chair, no church, no philosophy,	  I have no chair, no church, no philosophy,	  I have no chair, no church, no philosophy,
  I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, exchange,	  I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, exchange,	  I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, exchange,	  I lead no man to a dinner-table, library, exchange,
  But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,	  But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,	  But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,	  But each man and each woman of you I lead upon a knoll,
  My left hand hooking you round the waist,	  My left hand hooking you round the waist,	  My left hand hooking you round the waist,	  My left hand hooking you round the waist,
  My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and the public road.	  My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and the public road.	  My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and the public road.	  My right hand pointing to landscapes of continents and the public road.
			
  Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,	  Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,	  Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,	  Not I, not any one else can travel that road for you,
  You must travel it for yourself.	  You must travel it for yourself.	  You must travel it for yourself.	  You must travel it for yourself.
			
  It is not far, it is within reach,	  It is not far, it is within reach,	  It is not far, it is within reach,	  It is not far, it is within reach,
  Perhaps you have been on it since you were born and did not know,	  Perhaps you have been on it since you were born and did not know,	  Perhaps you have been on it since you were born and did not know,	  Perhaps you have been on it since you were born and did not know,
  Perhaps it is everywhere on water and on land.	  Perhaps it is everywhere on water and on land.	  Perhaps it is everywhere on water and on land.	  Perhaps it is everywhere on water and on land.
			
  Shoulder your duds dear son, and I will mine, and let us hasten forth,	  Shoulder your duds dear son, and I will mine, and let us hasten forth,	  Shoulder your duds dear son, and I will mine, and let us hasten forth,	  Shoulder your duds dear son, and I will mine, and let us hasten forth,
  Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as we go.	  Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as we go.	  Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as we go.	  Wonderful cities and free nations we shall fetch as we go.
			
  If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff of your hand	  If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff of your hand	  If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff of your hand	  If you tire, give me both burdens, and rest the chuff of your hand
      on my hip,	      on my hip,	      on my hip,	      on my hip,
  And in due time you shall repay the same service to me,	  And in due time you shall repay the same service to me,	  And in due time you shall repay the same service to me,	  And in due time you shall repay the same service to me,
  For after we start we never lie by again.	  For after we start we never lie by again.	  For after we start we never lie by again.	  For after we start we never lie by again.
			
  This day before dawn I ascended a hill and look'd at the crowded heaven,	  This day before dawn I ascended a hill and look'd at the crowded heaven,	  This day before dawn I ascended a hill and look'd at the crowded heaven,	  This day before dawn I ascended a hill and look'd at the crowded heaven,
  And I said to my spirit When we become the enfolders of those orbs,	  And I said to my spirit When we become the enfolders of those orbs,	  And I said to my spirit When we become the enfolders of those orbs,	  And I said to my spirit When we become the enfolders of those orbs,
      and the pleasure and knowledge of every thing in them, shall we	      and the pleasure and knowledge of every thing in them, shall we	      and the pleasure and knowledge of every thing in them, shall we	      and the pleasure and knowledge of every thing in them, shall we
      be fill'd and satisfied then?	      be fill'd and satisfied then?	      be fill'd and satisfied then?	      be fill'd and satisfied then?
  And my spirit said No, we but level that lift to pass and continue beyond.	  And my spirit said No, we but level that lift to pass and continue beyond.	  And my spirit said No, we but level that lift to pass and continue beyond.	  And my spirit said No, we but level that lift to pass and continue beyond.
			
  You are also asking me questions and I hear you,	  You are also asking me questions and I hear you,	  You are also asking me questions and I hear you,	  You are also asking me questions and I hear you,
  I answer that I cannot answer, you must find out for yourself.	  I answer that I cannot answer, you must find out for yourself.	  I answer that I cannot answer, you must find out for yourself.	  I answer that I cannot answer, you must find out for yourself.
			
  Sit a while dear son,	  Sit a while dear son,	  Sit a while dear son,	  Sit a while dear son,
  Here are biscuits to eat and here is milk to drink,	  Here are biscuits to eat and here is milk to drink,	  Here are biscuits to eat and here is milk to drink,	  Here are biscuits to eat and here is milk to drink,
  But as soon as you sleep and renew yourself in sweet clothes, I kiss you	  But as soon as you sleep and renew yourself in sweet clothes, I kiss you	  But as soon as you sleep and renew yourself in sweet clothes, I kiss you	  But as soon as you sleep and renew yourself in sweet clothes, I kiss you
      with a good-by kiss and open the gate for your egress hence.	      with a good-by kiss and open the gate for your egress hence.	      with a good-by kiss and open the gate for your egress hence.	      with a good-by kiss and open the gate for your egress hence.
			
  Long enough have you dream'd contemptible dreams,	  Long enough have you dream'd contemptible dreams,	  Long enough have you dream'd contemptible dreams,	  Long enough have you dream'd contemptible dreams,
  Now I wash the gum from your eyes,	  Now I wash the gum from your eyes,	  Now I wash the gum from your eyes,	  Now I wash the gum from your eyes,
  You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light and of every	  You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light and of every	  You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light and of every	  You must habit yourself to the dazzle of the light and of every
      moment of your life.	      moment of your life.	      moment of your life.	      moment of your life.
			
  Long have you timidly waded holding a plank by the shore,	  Long have you timidly waded holding a plank by the shore,	  Long have you timidly waded holding a plank by the shore,	  Long have you timidly waded holding a plank by the shore,
  Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,	  Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,	  Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,	  Now I will you to be a bold swimmer,
  To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod to me, shout,	  To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod to me, shout,	  To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod to me, shout,	  To jump off in the midst of the sea, rise again, nod to me, shout,
      and laughingly dash with your hair.	      and laughingly dash with your hair.	      and laughingly dash with your hair.	      and laughingly dash with your hair.
			
       47	       47	       47	       47
  I am the teacher of athletes,	  I am the teacher of athletes,	  I am the teacher of athletes,	  I am the teacher of athletes,
  He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own proves the width of my own,	  He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own proves the width of my own,	  He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own proves the width of my own,	  He that by me spreads a wider breast than my own proves the width of my own,
  He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher.	  He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher.	  He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher.	  He most honors my style who learns under it to destroy the teacher.
			
  The boy I love, the same becomes a man not through derived power,	  The boy I love, the same becomes a man not through derived power,	  The boy I love, the same becomes a man not through derived power,	  The boy I love, the same becomes a man not through derived power,
      but in his own right,	      but in his own right,	      but in his own right,	      but in his own right,
  Wicked rather than virtuous out of conformity or fear,	  Wicked rather than virtuous out of conformity or fear,	  Wicked rather than virtuous out of conformity or fear,	  Wicked rather than virtuous out of conformity or fear,
  Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak,	  Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak,	  Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak,	  Fond of his sweetheart, relishing well his steak,
  Unrequited love or a slight cutting him worse than sharp steel cuts,	  Unrequited love or a slight cutting him worse than sharp steel cuts,	  Unrequited love or a slight cutting him worse than sharp steel cuts,	  Unrequited love or a slight cutting him worse than sharp steel cuts,
  First-rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull's eye, to sail a	  First-rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull's eye, to sail a	  First-rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull's eye, to sail a	  First-rate to ride, to fight, to hit the bull's eye, to sail a
      skiff, to sing a song or play on the banjo,	      skiff, to sing a song or play on the banjo,	      skiff, to sing a song or play on the banjo,	      skiff, to sing a song or play on the banjo,
  Preferring scars and the beard and faces pitted with small-pox over	  Preferring scars and the beard and faces pitted with small-pox over	  Preferring scars and the beard and faces pitted with small-pox over	  Preferring scars and the beard and faces pitted with small-pox over
      all latherers,	      all latherers,	      all latherers,	      all latherers,
  And those well-tann'd to those that keep out of the sun.	  And those well-tann'd to those that keep out of the sun.	  And those well-tann'd to those that keep out of the sun.	  And those well-tann'd to those that keep out of the sun.
			
  I teach straying from me, yet who can stray from me?	  I teach straying from me, yet who can stray from me?	  I teach straying from me, yet who can stray from me?	  I teach straying from me, yet who can stray from me?
  I follow you whoever you are from the present hour,	  I follow you whoever you are from the present hour,	  I follow you whoever you are from the present hour,	  I follow you whoever you are from the present hour,
  My words itch at your ears till you understand them.	  My words itch at your ears till you understand them.	  My words itch at your ears till you understand them.	  My words itch at your ears till you understand them.
			
  I do not say these things for a dollar or to fill up the time while	  I do not say these things for a dollar or to fill up the time while	  I do not say these things for a dollar or to fill up the time while	  I do not say these things for a dollar or to fill up the time while
      I wait for a boat,	      I wait for a boat,	      I wait for a boat,	      I wait for a boat,
  (It is you talking just as much as myself, I act as the tongue of you,	  (It is you talking just as much as myself, I act as the tongue of you,	  (It is you talking just as much as myself, I act as the tongue of you,	  (It is you talking just as much as myself, I act as the tongue of you,
  Tied in your mouth, in mine it begins to be loosen'd.)	  Tied in your mouth, in mine it begins to be loosen'd.)	  Tied in your mouth, in mine it begins to be loosen'd.)	  Tied in your mouth, in mine it begins to be loosen'd.)
			
  I swear I will never again mention love or death inside a house,	  I swear I will never again mention love or death inside a house,	  I swear I will never again mention love or death inside a house,	  I swear I will never again mention love or death inside a house,
  And I swear I will never translate myself at all, only to him or her	  And I swear I will never translate myself at all, only to him or her	  And I swear I will never translate myself at all, only to him or her	  And I swear I will never translate myself at all, only to him or her
      who privately stays with me in the open air.	      who privately stays with me in the open air.	      who privately stays with me in the open air.	      who privately stays with me in the open air.
			
  If you would understand me go to the heights or water-shore,	  If you would understand me go to the heights or water-shore,	  If you would understand me go to the heights or water-shore,	  If you would understand me go to the heights or water-shore,
  The nearest gnat is an explanation, and a drop or motion of waves key,	  The nearest gnat is an explanation, and a drop or motion of waves key,	  The nearest gnat is an explanation, and a drop or motion of waves key,	  The nearest gnat is an explanation, and a drop or motion of waves key,
  The maul, the oar, the hand-saw, second my words.	  The maul, the oar, the hand-saw, second my words.	  The maul, the oar, the hand-saw, second my words.	  The maul, the oar, the hand-saw, second my words.
			
  No shutter'd room or school can commune with me,	  No shutter'd room or school can commune with me,	  No shutter'd room or school can commune with me,	  No shutter'd room or school can commune with me,
  But roughs and little children better than they.	  But roughs and little children better than they.	  But roughs and little children better than they.	  But roughs and little children better than they.
			
  The young mechanic is closest to me, he knows me well,	  The young mechanic is closest to me, he knows me well,	  The young mechanic is closest to me, he knows me well,	  The young mechanic is closest to me, he knows me well,
  The woodman that takes his axe and jug with him shall take me with	  The woodman that takes his axe and jug with him shall take me with	  The woodman that takes his axe and jug with him shall take me with	  The woodman that takes his axe and jug with him shall take me with
      him all day,	      him all day,	      him all day,	      him all day,
  The farm-boy ploughing in the field feels good at the sound of my voice,	  The farm-boy ploughing in the field feels good at the sound of my voice,	  The farm-boy ploughing in the field feels good at the sound of my voice,	  The farm-boy ploughing in the field feels good at the sound of my voice,
  In vessels that sail my words sail, I go with fishermen and seamen	  In vessels that sail my words sail, I go with fishermen and seamen	  In vessels that sail my words sail, I go with fishermen and seamen	  In vessels that sail my words sail, I go with fishermen and seamen
      and love them.	      and love them.	      and love them.	      and love them.
			
  The soldier camp'd or upon the march is mine,	  The soldier camp'd or upon the march is mine,	  The soldier camp'd or upon the march is mine,	  The soldier camp'd or upon the march is mine,
  On the night ere the pending battle many seek me, and I do not fail them,	  On the night ere the pending battle many seek me, and I do not fail them,	  On the night ere the pending battle many seek me, and I do not fail them,	  On the night ere the pending battle many seek me, and I do not fail them,
  On that solemn night (it may be their last) those that know me seek me.	  On that solemn night (it may be their last) those that know me seek me.	  On that solemn night (it may be their last) those that know me seek me.	  On that solemn night (it may be their last) those that know me seek me.
  My face rubs to the hunter's face when he lies down alone in his blanket,	  My face rubs to the hunter's face when he lies down alone in his blanket,	  My face rubs to the hunter's face when he lies down alone in his blanket,	  My face rubs to the hunter's face when he lies down alone in his blanket,
  The driver thinking of me does not mind the jolt of his wagon,	  The driver thinking of me does not mind the jolt of his wagon,	  The driver thinking of me does not mind the jolt of his wagon,	  The driver thinking of me does not mind the jolt of his wagon,
  The young mother and old mother comprehend me,	  The young mother and old mother comprehend me,	  The young mother and old mother comprehend me,	  The young mother and old mother comprehend me,
  The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment and forget where they are,	  The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment and forget where they are,	  The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment and forget where they are,	  The girl and the wife rest the needle a moment and forget where they are,
  They and all would resume what I have told them.	  They and all would resume what I have told them.	  They and all would resume what I have told them.	  They and all would resume what I have told them.
			
       48	       48	       48	       48
  I have said that the soul is not more than the body,	  I have said that the soul is not more than the body,	  I have said that the soul is not more than the body,	  I have said that the soul is not more than the body,
  And I have said that the body is not more than the soul,	  And I have said that the body is not more than the soul,	  And I have said that the body is not more than the soul,	  And I have said that the body is not more than the soul,
  And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one's self is,	  And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one's self is,	  And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one's self is,	  And nothing, not God, is greater to one than one's self is,
  And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy walks to his own	  And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy walks to his own	  And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy walks to his own	  And whoever walks a furlong without sympathy walks to his own
      funeral drest in his shroud,	      funeral drest in his shroud,	      funeral drest in his shroud,	      funeral drest in his shroud,
  And I or you pocketless of a dime may purchase the pick of the earth,	  And I or you pocketless of a dime may purchase the pick of the earth,	  And I or you pocketless of a dime may purchase the pick of the earth,	  And I or you pocketless of a dime may purchase the pick of the earth,
  And to glance with an eye or show a bean in its pod confounds the	  And to glance with an eye or show a bean in its pod confounds the	  And to glance with an eye or show a bean in its pod confounds the	  And to glance with an eye or show a bean in its pod confounds the
      learning of all times,	      learning of all times,	      learning of all times,	      learning of all times,
  And there is no trade or employment but the young man following it	  And there is no trade or employment but the young man following it	  And there is no trade or employment but the young man following it	  And there is no trade or employment but the young man following it
      may become a hero,	      may become a hero,	      may become a hero,	      may become a hero,
  And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for the wheel'd universe,	  And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for the wheel'd universe,	  And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for the wheel'd universe,	  And there is no object so soft but it makes a hub for the wheel'd universe,
  And I say to any man or woman, Let your soul stand cool and composed	  And I say to any man or woman, Let your soul stand cool and composed	  And I say to any man or woman, Let your soul stand cool and composed	  And I say to any man or woman, Let your soul stand cool and composed
      before a million universes.	      before a million universes.	      before a million universes.	      before a million universes.
			
  And I say to mankind, Be not curious about God,	  And I say to mankind, Be not curious about God,	  And I say to mankind, Be not curious about God,	  And I say to mankind, Be not curious about God,
  For I who am curious about each am not curious about God,	  For I who am curious about each am not curious about God,	  For I who am curious about each am not curious about God,	  For I who am curious about each am not curious about God,
  (No array of terms can say how much I am at peace about God and	  (No array of terms can say how much I am at peace about God and	  (No array of terms can say how much I am at peace about God and	  (No array of terms can say how much I am at peace about God and
      about death.)	      about death.)	      about death.)	      about death.)
			
  I hear and behold God in every object, yet understand God not in the least,	  I hear and behold God in every object, yet understand God not in the least,	  I hear and behold God in every object, yet understand God not in the least,	  I hear and behold God in every object, yet understand God not in the least,
  Nor do I understand who there can be more wonderful than myself.	  Nor do I understand who there can be more wonderful than myself.	  Nor do I understand who there can be more wonderful than myself.	  Nor do I understand who there can be more wonderful than myself.
			
  Why should I wish to see God better than this day?	  Why should I wish to see God better than this day?	  Why should I wish to see God better than this day?	  Why should I wish to see God better than this day?
  I see something of God each hour of the twenty-four, and each moment then,	  I see something of God each hour of the twenty-four, and each moment then,	  I see something of God each hour of the twenty-four, and each moment then,	  I see something of God each hour of the twenty-four, and each moment then,
  In the faces of men and women I see God, and in my own face in the glass,	  In the faces of men and women I see God, and in my own face in the glass,	  In the faces of men and women I see God, and in my own face in the glass,	  In the faces of men and women I see God, and in my own face in the glass,
  I find letters from God dropt in the street, and every one is sign'd	  I find letters from God dropt in the street, and every one is sign'd	  I find letters from God dropt in the street, and every one is sign'd	  I find letters from God dropt in the street, and every one is sign'd
      by God's name,	      by God's name,	      by God's name,	      by God's name,
  And I leave them where they are, for I know that wheresoe'er I go,	  And I leave them where they are, for I know that wheresoe'er I go,	  And I leave them where they are, for I know that wheresoe'er I go,	  And I leave them where they are, for I know that wheresoe'er I go,
  Others will punctually come for ever and ever.	  Others will punctually come for ever and ever.	  Others will punctually come for ever and ever.	  Others will punctually come for ever and ever.
			
       49	       49	       49	       49
  And as to you Death, and you bitter hug of mortality, it is idle to	  And as to you Death, and you bitter hug of mortality, it is idle to	  And as to you Death, and you bitter hug of mortality, it is idle to	  And as to you Death, and you bitter hug of mortality, it is idle to
      try to alarm me.	      try to alarm me.	      try to alarm me.	      try to alarm me.
			
  To his work without flinching the accoucheur comes,	  To his work without flinching the accoucheur comes,	  To his work without flinching the accoucheur comes,	  To his work without flinching the accoucheur comes,
  I see the elder-hand pressing receiving supporting,	  I see the elder-hand pressing receiving supporting,	  I see the elder-hand pressing receiving supporting,	  I see the elder-hand pressing receiving supporting,
  I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors,	  I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors,	  I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors,	  I recline by the sills of the exquisite flexible doors,
  And mark the outlet, and mark the relief and escape.	  And mark the outlet, and mark the relief and escape.	  And mark the outlet, and mark the relief and escape.	  And mark the outlet, and mark the relief and escape.
			
  And as to you Corpse I think you are good manure, but that does not	  And as to you Corpse I think you are good manure, but that does not	  And as to you Corpse I think you are good manure, but that does not	  And as to you Corpse I think you are good manure, but that does not
      offend me,	      offend me,	      offend me,	      offend me,
  I smell the white roses sweet-scented and growing,	  I smell the white roses sweet-scented and growing,	  I smell the white roses sweet-scented and growing,	  I smell the white roses sweet-scented and growing,
  I reach to the leafy lips, I reach to the polish'd breasts of melons.	  I reach to the leafy lips, I reach to the polish'd breasts of melons.	  I reach to the leafy lips, I reach to the polish'd breasts of melons.	  I reach to the leafy lips, I reach to the polish'd breasts of melons.
			
  And as to you Life I reckon you are the leavings of many deaths,	  And as to you Life I reckon you are the leavings of many deaths,	  And as to you Life I reckon you are the leavings of many deaths,	  And as to you Life I reckon you are the leavings of many deaths,
  (No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times before.)	  (No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times before.)	  (No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times before.)	  (No doubt I have died myself ten thousand times before.)
			
  I hear you whispering there O stars of heaven,	  I hear you whispering there O stars of heaven,	  I hear you whispering there O stars of heaven,	  I hear you whispering there O stars of heaven,
  O suns--O grass of graves--O perpetual transfers and promotions,	  O suns--O grass of graves--O perpetual transfers and promotions,	  O suns--O grass of graves--O perpetual transfers and promotions,	  O suns--O grass of graves--O perpetual transfers and promotions,
  If you do not say any thing how can I say any thing?	  If you do not say any thing how can I say any thing?	  If you do not say any thing how can I say any thing?	  If you do not say any thing how can I say any thing?
			
  Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest,	  Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest,	  Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest,	  Of the turbid pool that lies in the autumn forest,
  Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing twilight,	  Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing twilight,	  Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing twilight,	  Of the moon that descends the steeps of the soughing twilight,
  Toss, sparkles of day and dusk--toss on the black stems that decay	  Toss, sparkles of day and dusk--toss on the black stems that decay	  Toss, sparkles of day and dusk--toss on the black stems that decay	  Toss, sparkles of day and dusk--toss on the black stems that decay
      in the muck,	      in the muck,	      in the muck,	      in the muck,
  Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs.	  Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs.	  Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs.	  Toss to the moaning gibberish of the dry limbs.
			
  I ascend from the moon, I ascend from the night,	  I ascend from the moon, I ascend from the night,	  I ascend from the moon, I ascend from the night,	  I ascend from the moon, I ascend from the night,
  I perceive that the ghastly glimmer is noonday sunbeams reflected,	  I perceive that the ghastly glimmer is noonday sunbeams reflected,	  I perceive that the ghastly glimmer is noonday sunbeams reflected,	  I perceive that the ghastly glimmer is noonday sunbeams reflected,
  And debouch to the steady and central from the offspring great or small.	  And debouch to the steady and central from the offspring great or small.	  And debouch to the steady and central from the offspring great or small.	  And debouch to the steady and central from the offspring great or small.
			
       50	       50	       50	       50
  There is that in me--I do not know what it is--but I know it is in me.	  There is that in me--I do not know what it is--but I know it is in me.	  There is that in me--I do not know what it is--but I know it is in me.	  There is that in me--I do not know what it is--but I know it is in me.
			
  Wrench'd and sweaty--calm and cool then my body becomes,	  Wrench'd and sweaty--calm and cool then my body becomes,	  Wrench'd and sweaty--calm and cool then my body becomes,	  Wrench'd and sweaty--calm and cool then my body becomes,
  I sleep--I sleep long.	  I sleep--I sleep long.	  I sleep--I sleep long.	  I sleep--I sleep long.
			
  I do not know it--it is without name--it is a word unsaid,	  I do not know it--it is without name--it is a word unsaid,	  I do not know it--it is without name--it is a word unsaid,	  I do not know it--it is without name--it is a word unsaid,
  It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol.	  It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol.	  It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol.	  It is not in any dictionary, utterance, symbol.
			
  Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on,	  Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on,	  Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on,	  Something it swings on more than the earth I swing on,
  To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me.	  To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me.	  To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me.	  To it the creation is the friend whose embracing awakes me.
			
  Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters.	  Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters.	  Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters.	  Perhaps I might tell more. Outlines! I plead for my brothers and sisters.
			
  Do you see O my brothers and sisters?	  Do you see O my brothers and sisters?	  Do you see O my brothers and sisters?	  Do you see O my brothers and sisters?
  It is not chaos or death--it is form, union, plan--it is eternal	  It is not chaos or death--it is form, union, plan--it is eternal	  It is not chaos or death--it is form, union, plan--it is eternal	  It is not chaos or death--it is form, union, plan--it is eternal
      life--it is Happiness.	      life--it is Happiness.	      life--it is Happiness.	      life--it is Happiness.
			
       51	       51	       51	       51
  The past and present wilt--I have fill'd them, emptied them.	  The past and present wilt--I have fill'd them, emptied them.	  The past and present wilt--I have fill'd them, emptied them.	  The past and present wilt--I have fill'd them, emptied them.
  And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.	  And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.	  And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.	  And proceed to fill my next fold of the future.
			
  Listener up there! what have you to confide to me?	  Listener up there! what have you to confide to me?	  Listener up there! what have you to confide to me?	  Listener up there! what have you to confide to me?
  Look in my face while I snuff the sidle of evening,	  Look in my face while I snuff the sidle of evening,	  Look in my face while I snuff the sidle of evening,	  Look in my face while I snuff the sidle of evening,
  (Talk honestly, no one else hears you, and I stay only a minute longer.)	  (Talk honestly, no one else hears you, and I stay only a minute longer.)	  (Talk honestly, no one else hears you, and I stay only a minute longer.)	  (Talk honestly, no one else hears you, and I stay only a minute longer.)
			
  Do I contradict myself?	  Do I contradict myself?	  Do I contradict myself?	  Do I contradict myself?
  Very well then I contradict myself,	  Very well then I contradict myself,	  Very well then I contradict myself,	  Very well then I contradict myself,
  (I am large, I contain multitudes.)	  (I am large, I contain multitudes.)	  (I am large, I contain multitudes.)	  (I am large, I contain multitudes.)
			
  I concentrate toward them that are nigh, I wait on the door-slab.	  I concentrate toward them that are nigh, I wait on the door-slab.	  I concentrate toward them that are nigh, I wait on the door-slab.	  I concentrate toward them that are nigh, I wait on the door-slab.
			
  Who has done his day's work? who will soonest be through with his supper?	  Who has done his day's work? who will soonest be through with his supper?	  Who has done his day's work? who will soonest be through with his supper?	  Who has done his day's work? who will soonest be through with his supper?
  Who wishes to walk with me?	  Who wishes to walk with me?	  Who wishes to walk with me?	  Who wishes to walk with me?
			
  Will you speak before I am gone? will you prove already too late?	  Will you speak before I am gone? will you prove already too late?	  Will you speak before I am gone? will you prove already too late?	  Will you speak before I am gone? will you prove already too late?
			
       52	       52	       52	       52
  The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me, he complains of my gab	  The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me, he complains of my gab	  The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me, he complains of my gab	  The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me, he complains of my gab
      and my loitering.	      and my loitering.	      and my loitering.	      and my loitering.
			
  I too am not a bit tamed, I too am untranslatable,	  I too am not a bit tamed, I too am untranslatable,	  I too am not a bit tamed, I too am untranslatable,	  I too am not a bit tamed, I too am untranslatable,
  I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.	  I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.	  I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.	  I sound my barbaric yawp over the roofs of the world.
			
  The last scud of day holds back for me,	  The last scud of day holds back for me,	  The last scud of day holds back for me,	  The last scud of day holds back for me,
  It flings my likeness after the rest and true as any on the shadow'd wilds,	  It flings my likeness after the rest and true as any on the shadow'd wilds,	  It flings my likeness after the rest and true as any on the shadow'd wilds,	  It flings my likeness after the rest and true as any on the shadow'd wilds,
  It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.	  It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.	  It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.	  It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.
			
  I depart as air, I shake my white locks at the runaway sun,	  I depart as air, I shake my white locks at the runaway sun,	  I depart as air, I shake my white locks at the runaway sun,	  I depart as air, I shake my white locks at the runaway sun,
  I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.	  I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.	  I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.	  I effuse my flesh in eddies, and drift it in lacy jags.
			
  I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,	  I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,	  I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,	  I bequeath myself to the dirt to grow from the grass I love,
  If you want me again look for me under your boot-soles.	  If you want me again look for me under your boot-soles.	  If you want me again look for me under your boot-soles.	  If you want me again look for me under your boot-soles.
			
  You will hardly know who I am or what I mean,	  You will hardly know who I am or what I mean,	  You will hardly know who I am or what I mean,	  You will hardly know who I am or what I mean,
  But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,	  But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,	  But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,	  But I shall be good health to you nevertheless,
  And filter and fibre your blood.	  And filter and fibre your blood.	  And filter and fibre your blood.	  And filter and fibre your blood.
			
  Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged,	  Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged,	  Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged,	  Failing to fetch me at first keep encouraged,
  Missing me one place search another,	  Missing me one place search another,	  Missing me one place search another,	  Missing me one place search another,
  I stop somewhere waiting for you.	  I stop somewhere waiting for you.	  I stop somewhere waiting for you.	  I stop somewhere waiting for you.
			
			
			
			
BOOK IV.  CHILDREN OF ADAM	BOOK IV.  CHILDREN OF ADAM	BOOK IV.  CHILDREN OF ADAM	BOOK IV.  CHILDREN OF ADAM
			
			
To the Garden the World	To the Garden the World	To the Garden the World	To the Garden the World
			
  To the garden the world anew ascending,	  To the garden the world anew ascending,	  To the garden the world anew ascending,	  To the garden the world anew ascending,
  Potent mates, daughters, sons, preluding,	  Potent mates, daughters, sons, preluding,	  Potent mates, daughters, sons, preluding,	  Potent mates, daughters, sons, preluding,
  The love, the life of their bodies, meaning and being,	  The love, the life of their bodies, meaning and being,	  The love, the life of their bodies, meaning and being,	  The love, the life of their bodies, meaning and being,
  Curious here behold my resurrection after slumber,	  Curious here behold my resurrection after slumber,	  Curious here behold my resurrection after slumber,	  Curious here behold my resurrection after slumber,
  The revolving cycles in their wide sweep having brought me again,	  The revolving cycles in their wide sweep having brought me again,	  The revolving cycles in their wide sweep having brought me again,	  The revolving cycles in their wide sweep having brought me again,
  Amorous, mature, all beautiful to me, all wondrous,	  Amorous, mature, all beautiful to me, all wondrous,	  Amorous, mature, all beautiful to me, all wondrous,	  Amorous, mature, all beautiful to me, all wondrous,
  My limbs and the quivering fire that ever plays through them, for	  My limbs and the quivering fire that ever plays through them, for	  My limbs and the quivering fire that ever plays through them, for	  My limbs and the quivering fire that ever plays through them, for
      reasons, most wondrous,	      reasons, most wondrous,	      reasons, most wondrous,	      reasons, most wondrous,
  Existing I peer and penetrate still,	  Existing I peer and penetrate still,	  Existing I peer and penetrate still,	  Existing I peer and penetrate still,
  Content with the present, content with the past,	  Content with the present, content with the past,	  Content with the present, content with the past,	  Content with the present, content with the past,
  By my side or back of me Eve following,	  By my side or back of me Eve following,	  By my side or back of me Eve following,	  By my side or back of me Eve following,
  Or in front, and I following her just the same.	  Or in front, and I following her just the same.	  Or in front, and I following her just the same.	  Or in front, and I following her just the same.
			
			
			
			
From Pent-Up Aching Rivers	From Pent-Up Aching Rivers	From Pent-Up Aching Rivers	From Pent-Up Aching Rivers
			
  From pent-up aching rivers,	  From pent-up aching rivers,	  From pent-up aching rivers,	  From pent-up aching rivers,
  From that of myself without which I were nothing,	  From that of myself without which I were nothing,	  From that of myself without which I were nothing,	  From that of myself without which I were nothing,
  From what I am determin'd to make illustrious, even if I stand sole	  From what I am determin'd to make illustrious, even if I stand sole	  From what I am determin'd to make illustrious, even if I stand sole	  From what I am determin'd to make illustrious, even if I stand sole
      among men,	      among men,	      among men,	      among men,
  From my own voice resonant, singing the phallus,	  From my own voice resonant, singing the phallus,	  From my own voice resonant, singing the phallus,	  From my own voice resonant, singing the phallus,
  Singing the song of procreation,	  Singing the song of procreation,	  Singing the song of procreation,	  Singing the song of procreation,
  Singing the need of superb children and therein superb grown people,	  Singing the need of superb children and therein superb grown people,	  Singing the need of superb children and therein superb grown people,	  Singing the need of superb children and therein superb grown people,
  Singing the muscular urge and the blending,	  Singing the muscular urge and the blending,	  Singing the muscular urge and the blending,	  Singing the muscular urge and the blending,
  Singing the bedfellow's song, (O resistless yearning!	  Singing the bedfellow's song, (O resistless yearning!	  Singing the bedfellow's song, (O resistless yearning!	  Singing the bedfellow's song, (O resistless yearning!
  O for any and each the body correlative attracting!	  O for any and each the body correlative attracting!	  O for any and each the body correlative attracting!	  O for any and each the body correlative attracting!
  O for you whoever you are your correlative body! O it, more than all	  O for you whoever you are your correlative body! O it, more than all	  O for you whoever you are your correlative body! O it, more than all	  O for you whoever you are your correlative body! O it, more than all
      else, you delighting!)	      else, you delighting!)	      else, you delighting!)	      else, you delighting!)
  From the hungry gnaw that eats me night and day,	  From the hungry gnaw that eats me night and day,	  From the hungry gnaw that eats me night and day,	  From the hungry gnaw that eats me night and day,
  From native moments, from bashful pains, singing them,	  From native moments, from bashful pains, singing them,	  From native moments, from bashful pains, singing them,	  From native moments, from bashful pains, singing them,
  Seeking something yet unfound though I have diligently sought it	  Seeking something yet unfound though I have diligently sought it	  Seeking something yet unfound though I have diligently sought it	  Seeking something yet unfound though I have diligently sought it
      many a long year,	      many a long year,	      many a long year,	      many a long year,
  Singing the true song of the soul fitful at random,	  Singing the true song of the soul fitful at random,	  Singing the true song of the soul fitful at random,	  Singing the true song of the soul fitful at random,
  Renascent with grossest Nature or among animals,	  Renascent with grossest Nature or among animals,	  Renascent with grossest Nature or among animals,	  Renascent with grossest Nature or among animals,
  Of that, of them and what goes with them my poems informing,	  Of that, of them and what goes with them my poems informing,	  Of that, of them and what goes with them my poems informing,	  Of that, of them and what goes with them my poems informing,
  Of the smell of apples and lemons, of the pairing of birds,	  Of the smell of apples and lemons, of the pairing of birds,	  Of the smell of apples and lemons, of the pairing of birds,	  Of the smell of apples and lemons, of the pairing of birds,
  Of the wet of woods, of the lapping of waves,	  Of the wet of woods, of the lapping of waves,	  Of the wet of woods, of the lapping of waves,	  Of the wet of woods, of the lapping of waves,
  Of the mad pushes of waves upon the land, I them chanting,	  Of the mad pushes of waves upon the land, I them chanting,	  Of the mad pushes of waves upon the land, I them chanting,	  Of the mad pushes of waves upon the land, I them chanting,
  The overture lightly sounding, the strain anticipating,	  The overture lightly sounding, the strain anticipating,	  The overture lightly sounding, the strain anticipating,	  The overture lightly sounding, the strain anticipating,
  The welcome nearness, the sight of the perfect body,	  The welcome nearness, the sight of the perfect body,	  The welcome nearness, the sight of the perfect body,	  The welcome nearness, the sight of the perfect body,
  The swimmer swimming naked in the bath, or motionless on his back	  The swimmer swimming naked in the bath, or motionless on his back	  The swimmer swimming naked in the bath, or motionless on his back	  The swimmer swimming naked in the bath, or motionless on his back
      lying and floating,	      lying and floating,	      lying and floating,	      lying and floating,
  The female form approaching, I pensive, love-flesh tremulous aching,	  The female form approaching, I pensive, love-flesh tremulous aching,	  The female form approaching, I pensive, love-flesh tremulous aching,	  The female form approaching, I pensive, love-flesh tremulous aching,
  The divine list for myself or you or for any one making,	  The divine list for myself or you or for any one making,	  The divine list for myself or you or for any one making,	  The divine list for myself or you or for any one making,
  The face, the limbs, the index from head to foot, and what it arouses,	  The face, the limbs, the index from head to foot, and what it arouses,	  The face, the limbs, the index from head to foot, and what it arouses,	  The face, the limbs, the index from head to foot, and what it arouses,
  The mystic deliria, the madness amorous, the utter abandonment,	  The mystic deliria, the madness amorous, the utter abandonment,	  The mystic deliria, the madness amorous, the utter abandonment,	  The mystic deliria, the madness amorous, the utter abandonment,
  (Hark close and still what I now whisper to you,	  (Hark close and still what I now whisper to you,	  (Hark close and still what I now whisper to you,	  (Hark close and still what I now whisper to you,
  I love you, O you entirely possess me,	  I love you, O you entirely possess me,	  I love you, O you entirely possess me,	  I love you, O you entirely possess me,
  O that you and I escape from the rest and go utterly off, free and lawless,	  O that you and I escape from the rest and go utterly off, free and lawless,	  O that you and I escape from the rest and go utterly off, free and lawless,	  O that you and I escape from the rest and go utterly off, free and lawless,
  Two hawks in the air, two fishes swimming in the sea not more	  Two hawks in the air, two fishes swimming in the sea not more	  Two hawks in the air, two fishes swimming in the sea not more	  Two hawks in the air, two fishes swimming in the sea not more
      lawless than we;)	      lawless than we;)	      lawless than we;)	      lawless than we;)
  The furious storm through me careering, I passionately trembling.	  The furious storm through me careering, I passionately trembling.	  The furious storm through me careering, I passionately trembling.	  The furious storm through me careering, I passionately trembling.
  The oath of the inseparableness of two together, of the woman that	  The oath of the inseparableness of two together, of the woman that	  The oath of the inseparableness of two together, of the woman that	  The oath of the inseparableness of two together, of the woman that
      loves me and whom I love more than my life, that oath swearing,	      loves me and whom I love more than my life, that oath swearing,	      loves me and whom I love more than my life, that oath swearing,	      loves me and whom I love more than my life, that oath swearing,
  (O I willingly stake all for you,	  (O I willingly stake all for you,	  (O I willingly stake all for you,	  (O I willingly stake all for you,
  O let me be lost if it must be so!	  O let me be lost if it must be so!	  O let me be lost if it must be so!	  O let me be lost if it must be so!
  O you and I! what is it to us what the rest do or think?	  O you and I! what is it to us what the rest do or think?	  O you and I! what is it to us what the rest do or think?	  O you and I! what is it to us what the rest do or think?
  What is all else to us? only that we enjoy each other and exhaust	  What is all else to us? only that we enjoy each other and exhaust	  What is all else to us? only that we enjoy each other and exhaust	  What is all else to us? only that we enjoy each other and exhaust
      each other if it must be so;)	      each other if it must be so;)	      each other if it must be so;)	      each other if it must be so;)
  From the master, the pilot I yield the vessel to,	  From the master, the pilot I yield the vessel to,	  From the master, the pilot I yield the vessel to,	  From the master, the pilot I yield the vessel to,
  The general commanding me, commanding all, from him permission taking,	  The general commanding me, commanding all, from him permission taking,	  The general commanding me, commanding all, from him permission taking,	  The general commanding me, commanding all, from him permission taking,
  From time the programme hastening, (I have loiter'd too long as it is,)	  From time the programme hastening, (I have loiter'd too long as it is,)	  From time the programme hastening, (I have loiter'd too long as it is,)	  From time the programme hastening, (I have loiter'd too long as it is,)
  From sex, from the warp and from the woof,	  From sex, from the warp and from the woof,	  From sex, from the warp and from the woof,	  From sex, from the warp and from the woof,
  From privacy, from frequent repinings alone,	  From privacy, from frequent repinings alone,	  From privacy, from frequent repinings alone,	  From privacy, from frequent repinings alone,
  From plenty of persons near and yet the right person not near,	  From plenty of persons near and yet the right person not near,	  From plenty of persons near and yet the right person not near,	  From plenty of persons near and yet the right person not near,
  From the soft sliding of hands over me and thrusting of fingers	  From the soft sliding of hands over me and thrusting of fingers	  From the soft sliding of hands over me and thrusting of fingers	  From the soft sliding of hands over me and thrusting of fingers
      through my hair and beard,	      through my hair and beard,	      through my hair and beard,	      through my hair and beard,
  From the long sustain'd kiss upon the mouth or bosom,	  From the long sustain'd kiss upon the mouth or bosom,	  From the long sustain'd kiss upon the mouth or bosom,	  From the long sustain'd kiss upon the mouth or bosom,
  From the close pressure that makes me or any man drunk, fainting	  From the close pressure that makes me or any man drunk, fainting	  From the close pressure that makes me or any man drunk, fainting	  From the close pressure that makes me or any man drunk, fainting
      with excess,	      with excess,	      with excess,	      with excess,
  From what the divine husband knows, from the work of fatherhood,	  From what the divine husband knows, from the work of fatherhood,	  From what the divine husband knows, from the work of fatherhood,	  From what the divine husband knows, from the work of fatherhood,
  From exultation, victory and relief, from the bedfellow's embrace in	  From exultation, victory and relief, from the bedfellow's embrace in	  From exultation, victory and relief, from the bedfellow's embrace in	  From exultation, victory and relief, from the bedfellow's embrace in
      the night,	      the night,	      the night,	      the night,
  From the act-poems of eyes, hands, hips and bosoms,	  From the act-poems of eyes, hands, hips and bosoms,	  From the act-poems of eyes, hands, hips and bosoms,	  From the act-poems of eyes, hands, hips and bosoms,
  From the cling of the trembling arm,	  From the cling of the trembling arm,	  From the cling of the trembling arm,	  From the cling of the trembling arm,
  From the bending curve and the clinch,	  From the bending curve and the clinch,	  From the bending curve and the clinch,	  From the bending curve and the clinch,
  From side by side the pliant coverlet off-throwing,	  From side by side the pliant coverlet off-throwing,	  From side by side the pliant coverlet off-throwing,	  From side by side the pliant coverlet off-throwing,
  From the one so unwilling to have me leave, and me just as unwilling	  From the one so unwilling to have me leave, and me just as unwilling	  From the one so unwilling to have me leave, and me just as unwilling	  From the one so unwilling to have me leave, and me just as unwilling
      to leave,	      to leave,	      to leave,	      to leave,
  (Yet a moment O tender waiter, and I return,)	  (Yet a moment O tender waiter, and I return,)	  (Yet a moment O tender waiter, and I return,)	  (Yet a moment O tender waiter, and I return,)
  From the hour of shining stars and dropping dews,	  From the hour of shining stars and dropping dews,	  From the hour of shining stars and dropping dews,	  From the hour of shining stars and dropping dews,
  From the night a moment I emerging flitting out,	  From the night a moment I emerging flitting out,	  From the night a moment I emerging flitting out,	  From the night a moment I emerging flitting out,
  Celebrate you act divine and you children prepared for,	  Celebrate you act divine and you children prepared for,	  Celebrate you act divine and you children prepared for,	  Celebrate you act divine and you children prepared for,
  And you stalwart loins.	  And you stalwart loins.	  And you stalwart loins.	  And you stalwart loins.
			
			
			
			
I Sing the Body Electric	I Sing the Body Electric	I Sing the Body Electric	I Sing the Body Electric
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  I sing the body electric,	  I sing the body electric,	  I sing the body electric,	  I sing the body electric,
  The armies of those I love engirth me and I engirth them,	  The armies of those I love engirth me and I engirth them,	  The armies of those I love engirth me and I engirth them,	  The armies of those I love engirth me and I engirth them,
  They will not let me off till I go with them, respond to them,	  They will not let me off till I go with them, respond to them,	  They will not let me off till I go with them, respond to them,	  They will not let me off till I go with them, respond to them,
  And discorrupt them, and charge them full with the charge of the soul.	  And discorrupt them, and charge them full with the charge of the soul.	  And discorrupt them, and charge them full with the charge of the soul.	  And discorrupt them, and charge them full with the charge of the soul.
			
  Was it doubted that those who corrupt their own bodies conceal themselves?	  Was it doubted that those who corrupt their own bodies conceal themselves?	  Was it doubted that those who corrupt their own bodies conceal themselves?	  Was it doubted that those who corrupt their own bodies conceal themselves?
  And if those who defile the living are as bad as they who defile the dead?	  And if those who defile the living are as bad as they who defile the dead?	  And if those who defile the living are as bad as they who defile the dead?	  And if those who defile the living are as bad as they who defile the dead?
  And if the body does not do fully as much as the soul?	  And if the body does not do fully as much as the soul?	  And if the body does not do fully as much as the soul?	  And if the body does not do fully as much as the soul?
  And if the body were not the soul, what is the soul?	  And if the body were not the soul, what is the soul?	  And if the body were not the soul, what is the soul?	  And if the body were not the soul, what is the soul?
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  The love of the body of man or woman balks account, the body itself	  The love of the body of man or woman balks account, the body itself	  The love of the body of man or woman balks account, the body itself	  The love of the body of man or woman balks account, the body itself
      balks account,	      balks account,	      balks account,	      balks account,
  That of the male is perfect, and that of the female is perfect.	  That of the male is perfect, and that of the female is perfect.	  That of the male is perfect, and that of the female is perfect.	  That of the male is perfect, and that of the female is perfect.
			
  The expression of the face balks account,	  The expression of the face balks account,	  The expression of the face balks account,	  The expression of the face balks account,
  But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face,	  But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face,	  But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face,	  But the expression of a well-made man appears not only in his face,
  It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of	  It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of	  It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of	  It is in his limbs and joints also, it is curiously in the joints of
      his hips and wrists,	      his hips and wrists,	      his hips and wrists,	      his hips and wrists,
  It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist	  It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist	  It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist	  It is in his walk, the carriage of his neck, the flex of his waist
      and knees, dress does not hide him,	      and knees, dress does not hide him,	      and knees, dress does not hide him,	      and knees, dress does not hide him,
  The strong sweet quality he has strikes through the cotton and broadcloth,	  The strong sweet quality he has strikes through the cotton and broadcloth,	  The strong sweet quality he has strikes through the cotton and broadcloth,	  The strong sweet quality he has strikes through the cotton and broadcloth,
  To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps more,	  To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps more,	  To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps more,	  To see him pass conveys as much as the best poem, perhaps more,
  You linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and shoulder-side.	  You linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and shoulder-side.	  You linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and shoulder-side.	  You linger to see his back, and the back of his neck and shoulder-side.
			
  The sprawl and fulness of babes, the bosoms and heads of women, the	  The sprawl and fulness of babes, the bosoms and heads of women, the	  The sprawl and fulness of babes, the bosoms and heads of women, the	  The sprawl and fulness of babes, the bosoms and heads of women, the
      folds of their dress, their style as we pass in the street, the	      folds of their dress, their style as we pass in the street, the	      folds of their dress, their style as we pass in the street, the	      folds of their dress, their style as we pass in the street, the
      contour of their shape downwards,	      contour of their shape downwards,	      contour of their shape downwards,	      contour of their shape downwards,
  The swimmer naked in the swimming-bath, seen as he swims through	  The swimmer naked in the swimming-bath, seen as he swims through	  The swimmer naked in the swimming-bath, seen as he swims through	  The swimmer naked in the swimming-bath, seen as he swims through
      the transparent green-shine, or lies with his face up and rolls	      the transparent green-shine, or lies with his face up and rolls	      the transparent green-shine, or lies with his face up and rolls	      the transparent green-shine, or lies with his face up and rolls
      silently to and from the heave of the water,	      silently to and from the heave of the water,	      silently to and from the heave of the water,	      silently to and from the heave of the water,
  The bending forward and backward of rowers in row-boats, the	  The bending forward and backward of rowers in row-boats, the	  The bending forward and backward of rowers in row-boats, the	  The bending forward and backward of rowers in row-boats, the
      horse-man in his saddle,	      horse-man in his saddle,	      horse-man in his saddle,	      horse-man in his saddle,
  Girls, mothers, house-keepers, in all their performances,	  Girls, mothers, house-keepers, in all their performances,	  Girls, mothers, house-keepers, in all their performances,	  Girls, mothers, house-keepers, in all their performances,
  The group of laborers seated at noon-time with their open	  The group of laborers seated at noon-time with their open	  The group of laborers seated at noon-time with their open	  The group of laborers seated at noon-time with their open
      dinner-kettles, and their wives waiting,	      dinner-kettles, and their wives waiting,	      dinner-kettles, and their wives waiting,	      dinner-kettles, and their wives waiting,
  The female soothing a child, the farmer's daughter in the garden or	  The female soothing a child, the farmer's daughter in the garden or	  The female soothing a child, the farmer's daughter in the garden or	  The female soothing a child, the farmer's daughter in the garden or
      cow-yard,	      cow-yard,	      cow-yard,	      cow-yard,
  The young fellow hosing corn, the sleigh-driver driving his six	  The young fellow hosing corn, the sleigh-driver driving his six	  The young fellow hosing corn, the sleigh-driver driving his six	  The young fellow hosing corn, the sleigh-driver driving his six
      horses through the crowd,	      horses through the crowd,	      horses through the crowd,	      horses through the crowd,
  The wrestle of wrestlers, two apprentice-boys, quite grown, lusty,	  The wrestle of wrestlers, two apprentice-boys, quite grown, lusty,	  The wrestle of wrestlers, two apprentice-boys, quite grown, lusty,	  The wrestle of wrestlers, two apprentice-boys, quite grown, lusty,
      good-natured, native-born, out on the vacant lot at sundown after work,	      good-natured, native-born, out on the vacant lot at sundown after work,	      good-natured, native-born, out on the vacant lot at sundown after work,	      good-natured, native-born, out on the vacant lot at sundown after work,
  The coats and caps thrown down, the embrace of love and resistance,	  The coats and caps thrown down, the embrace of love and resistance,	  The coats and caps thrown down, the embrace of love and resistance,	  The coats and caps thrown down, the embrace of love and resistance,
  The upper-hold and under-hold, the hair rumpled over and blinding the eyes;	  The upper-hold and under-hold, the hair rumpled over and blinding the eyes;	  The upper-hold and under-hold, the hair rumpled over and blinding the eyes;	  The upper-hold and under-hold, the hair rumpled over and blinding the eyes;
  The march of firemen in their own costumes, the play of masculine	  The march of firemen in their own costumes, the play of masculine	  The march of firemen in their own costumes, the play of masculine	  The march of firemen in their own costumes, the play of masculine
      muscle through clean-setting trowsers and waist-straps,	      muscle through clean-setting trowsers and waist-straps,	      muscle through clean-setting trowsers and waist-straps,	      muscle through clean-setting trowsers and waist-straps,
  The slow return from the fire, the pause when the bell strikes	  The slow return from the fire, the pause when the bell strikes	  The slow return from the fire, the pause when the bell strikes	  The slow return from the fire, the pause when the bell strikes
      suddenly again, and the listening on the alert,	      suddenly again, and the listening on the alert,	      suddenly again, and the listening on the alert,	      suddenly again, and the listening on the alert,
  The natural, perfect, varied attitudes, the bent head, the curv'd	  The natural, perfect, varied attitudes, the bent head, the curv'd	  The natural, perfect, varied attitudes, the bent head, the curv'd	  The natural, perfect, varied attitudes, the bent head, the curv'd
      neck and the counting;	      neck and the counting;	      neck and the counting;	      neck and the counting;
  Such-like I love--I loosen myself, pass freely, am at the mother's	  Such-like I love--I loosen myself, pass freely, am at the mother's	  Such-like I love--I loosen myself, pass freely, am at the mother's	  Such-like I love--I loosen myself, pass freely, am at the mother's
      breast with the little child,	      breast with the little child,	      breast with the little child,	      breast with the little child,
  Swim with the swimmers, wrestle with wrestlers, march in line with	  Swim with the swimmers, wrestle with wrestlers, march in line with	  Swim with the swimmers, wrestle with wrestlers, march in line with	  Swim with the swimmers, wrestle with wrestlers, march in line with
      the firemen, and pause, listen, count.	      the firemen, and pause, listen, count.	      the firemen, and pause, listen, count.	      the firemen, and pause, listen, count.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  I knew a man, a common farmer, the father of five sons,	  I knew a man, a common farmer, the father of five sons,	  I knew a man, a common farmer, the father of five sons,	  I knew a man, a common farmer, the father of five sons,
  And in them the fathers of sons, and in them the fathers of sons.	  And in them the fathers of sons, and in them the fathers of sons.	  And in them the fathers of sons, and in them the fathers of sons.	  And in them the fathers of sons, and in them the fathers of sons.
			
  This man was a wonderful vigor, calmness, beauty of person,	  This man was a wonderful vigor, calmness, beauty of person,	  This man was a wonderful vigor, calmness, beauty of person,	  This man was a wonderful vigor, calmness, beauty of person,
  The shape of his head, the pale yellow and white of his hair and	  The shape of his head, the pale yellow and white of his hair and	  The shape of his head, the pale yellow and white of his hair and	  The shape of his head, the pale yellow and white of his hair and
      beard, the immeasurable meaning of his black eyes, the richness	      beard, the immeasurable meaning of his black eyes, the richness	      beard, the immeasurable meaning of his black eyes, the richness	      beard, the immeasurable meaning of his black eyes, the richness
      and breadth of his manners,	      and breadth of his manners,	      and breadth of his manners,	      and breadth of his manners,
  These I used to go and visit him to see, he was wise also,	  These I used to go and visit him to see, he was wise also,	  These I used to go and visit him to see, he was wise also,	  These I used to go and visit him to see, he was wise also,
  He was six feet tall, he was over eighty years old, his sons were	  He was six feet tall, he was over eighty years old, his sons were	  He was six feet tall, he was over eighty years old, his sons were	  He was six feet tall, he was over eighty years old, his sons were
      massive, clean, bearded, tan-faced, handsome,	      massive, clean, bearded, tan-faced, handsome,	      massive, clean, bearded, tan-faced, handsome,	      massive, clean, bearded, tan-faced, handsome,
  They and his daughters loved him, all who saw him loved him,	  They and his daughters loved him, all who saw him loved him,	  They and his daughters loved him, all who saw him loved him,	  They and his daughters loved him, all who saw him loved him,
  They did not love him by allowance, they loved him with personal love,	  They did not love him by allowance, they loved him with personal love,	  They did not love him by allowance, they loved him with personal love,	  They did not love him by allowance, they loved him with personal love,
  He drank water only, the blood show'd like scarlet through the	  He drank water only, the blood show'd like scarlet through the	  He drank water only, the blood show'd like scarlet through the	  He drank water only, the blood show'd like scarlet through the
      clear-brown skin of his face,	      clear-brown skin of his face,	      clear-brown skin of his face,	      clear-brown skin of his face,
  He was a frequent gunner and fisher, he sail'd his boat himself, he	  He was a frequent gunner and fisher, he sail'd his boat himself, he	  He was a frequent gunner and fisher, he sail'd his boat himself, he	  He was a frequent gunner and fisher, he sail'd his boat himself, he
      had a fine one presented to him by a ship-joiner, he had	      had a fine one presented to him by a ship-joiner, he had	      had a fine one presented to him by a ship-joiner, he had	      had a fine one presented to him by a ship-joiner, he had
      fowling-pieces presented to him by men that loved him,	      fowling-pieces presented to him by men that loved him,	      fowling-pieces presented to him by men that loved him,	      fowling-pieces presented to him by men that loved him,
  When he went with his five sons and many grand-sons to hunt or fish,	  When he went with his five sons and many grand-sons to hunt or fish,	  When he went with his five sons and many grand-sons to hunt or fish,	  When he went with his five sons and many grand-sons to hunt or fish,
      you would pick him out as the most beautiful and vigorous of the gang,	      you would pick him out as the most beautiful and vigorous of the gang,	      you would pick him out as the most beautiful and vigorous of the gang,	      you would pick him out as the most beautiful and vigorous of the gang,
  You would wish long and long to be with him, you would wish to sit	  You would wish long and long to be with him, you would wish to sit	  You would wish long and long to be with him, you would wish to sit	  You would wish long and long to be with him, you would wish to sit
      by him in the boat that you and he might touch each other.	      by him in the boat that you and he might touch each other.	      by him in the boat that you and he might touch each other.	      by him in the boat that you and he might touch each other.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  I have perceiv'd that to be with those I like is enough,	  I have perceiv'd that to be with those I like is enough,	  I have perceiv'd that to be with those I like is enough,	  I have perceiv'd that to be with those I like is enough,
  To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough,	  To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough,	  To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough,	  To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough,
  To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing, laughing flesh is enough,	  To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing, laughing flesh is enough,	  To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing, laughing flesh is enough,	  To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing, laughing flesh is enough,
  To pass among them or touch any one, or rest my arm ever so lightly	  To pass among them or touch any one, or rest my arm ever so lightly	  To pass among them or touch any one, or rest my arm ever so lightly	  To pass among them or touch any one, or rest my arm ever so lightly
      round his or her neck for a moment, what is this then?	      round his or her neck for a moment, what is this then?	      round his or her neck for a moment, what is this then?	      round his or her neck for a moment, what is this then?
  I do not ask any more delight, I swim in it as in a sea.	  I do not ask any more delight, I swim in it as in a sea.	  I do not ask any more delight, I swim in it as in a sea.	  I do not ask any more delight, I swim in it as in a sea.
			
  There is something in staying close to men and women and looking	  There is something in staying close to men and women and looking	  There is something in staying close to men and women and looking	  There is something in staying close to men and women and looking
      on them, and in the contact and odor of them, that pleases the soul well,	      on them, and in the contact and odor of them, that pleases the soul well,	      on them, and in the contact and odor of them, that pleases the soul well,	      on them, and in the contact and odor of them, that pleases the soul well,
  All things please the soul, but these please the soul well.	  All things please the soul, but these please the soul well.	  All things please the soul, but these please the soul well.	  All things please the soul, but these please the soul well.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  This is the female form,	  This is the female form,	  This is the female form,	  This is the female form,
  A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot,	  A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot,	  A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot,	  A divine nimbus exhales from it from head to foot,
  It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction,	  It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction,	  It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction,	  It attracts with fierce undeniable attraction,
  I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a helpless vapor,	  I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a helpless vapor,	  I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a helpless vapor,	  I am drawn by its breath as if I were no more than a helpless vapor,
      all falls aside but myself and it,	      all falls aside but myself and it,	      all falls aside but myself and it,	      all falls aside but myself and it,
  Books, art, religion, time, the visible and solid earth, and what	  Books, art, religion, time, the visible and solid earth, and what	  Books, art, religion, time, the visible and solid earth, and what	  Books, art, religion, time, the visible and solid earth, and what
      was expected of heaven or fear'd of hell, are now consumed,	      was expected of heaven or fear'd of hell, are now consumed,	      was expected of heaven or fear'd of hell, are now consumed,	      was expected of heaven or fear'd of hell, are now consumed,
  Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it, the response	  Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it, the response	  Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it, the response	  Mad filaments, ungovernable shoots play out of it, the response
      likewise ungovernable,	      likewise ungovernable,	      likewise ungovernable,	      likewise ungovernable,
  Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands all	  Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands all	  Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands all	  Hair, bosom, hips, bend of legs, negligent falling hands all
      diffused, mine too diffused,	      diffused, mine too diffused,	      diffused, mine too diffused,	      diffused, mine too diffused,
  Ebb stung by the flow and flow stung by the ebb, love-flesh swelling	  Ebb stung by the flow and flow stung by the ebb, love-flesh swelling	  Ebb stung by the flow and flow stung by the ebb, love-flesh swelling	  Ebb stung by the flow and flow stung by the ebb, love-flesh swelling
      and deliciously aching,	      and deliciously aching,	      and deliciously aching,	      and deliciously aching,
  Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous, quivering jelly of	  Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous, quivering jelly of	  Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous, quivering jelly of	  Limitless limpid jets of love hot and enormous, quivering jelly of
      love, white-blow and delirious nice,	      love, white-blow and delirious nice,	      love, white-blow and delirious nice,	      love, white-blow and delirious nice,
  Bridegroom night of love working surely and softly into the prostrate dawn,	  Bridegroom night of love working surely and softly into the prostrate dawn,	  Bridegroom night of love working surely and softly into the prostrate dawn,	  Bridegroom night of love working surely and softly into the prostrate dawn,
  Undulating into the willing and yielding day,	  Undulating into the willing and yielding day,	  Undulating into the willing and yielding day,	  Undulating into the willing and yielding day,
  Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweet-flesh'd day.	  Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweet-flesh'd day.	  Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweet-flesh'd day.	  Lost in the cleave of the clasping and sweet-flesh'd day.
			
  This the nucleus--after the child is born of woman, man is born of woman,	  This the nucleus--after the child is born of woman, man is born of woman,	  This the nucleus--after the child is born of woman, man is born of woman,	  This the nucleus--after the child is born of woman, man is born of woman,
  This the bath of birth, this the merge of small and large, and the	  This the bath of birth, this the merge of small and large, and the	  This the bath of birth, this the merge of small and large, and the	  This the bath of birth, this the merge of small and large, and the
      outlet again.	      outlet again.	      outlet again.	      outlet again.
			
  Be not ashamed women, your privilege encloses the rest, and is the	  Be not ashamed women, your privilege encloses the rest, and is the	  Be not ashamed women, your privilege encloses the rest, and is the	  Be not ashamed women, your privilege encloses the rest, and is the
      exit of the rest,	      exit of the rest,	      exit of the rest,	      exit of the rest,
  You are the gates of the body, and you are the gates of the soul.	  You are the gates of the body, and you are the gates of the soul.	  You are the gates of the body, and you are the gates of the soul.	  You are the gates of the body, and you are the gates of the soul.
			
  The female contains all qualities and tempers them,	  The female contains all qualities and tempers them,	  The female contains all qualities and tempers them,	  The female contains all qualities and tempers them,
  She is in her place and moves with perfect balance,	  She is in her place and moves with perfect balance,	  She is in her place and moves with perfect balance,	  She is in her place and moves with perfect balance,
  She is all things duly veil'd, she is both passive and active,	  She is all things duly veil'd, she is both passive and active,	  She is all things duly veil'd, she is both passive and active,	  She is all things duly veil'd, she is both passive and active,
  She is to conceive daughters as well as sons, and sons as well as daughters.	  She is to conceive daughters as well as sons, and sons as well as daughters.	  She is to conceive daughters as well as sons, and sons as well as daughters.	  She is to conceive daughters as well as sons, and sons as well as daughters.
			
  As I see my soul reflected in Nature,	  As I see my soul reflected in Nature,	  As I see my soul reflected in Nature,	  As I see my soul reflected in Nature,
  As I see through a mist, One with inexpressible completeness,	  As I see through a mist, One with inexpressible completeness,	  As I see through a mist, One with inexpressible completeness,	  As I see through a mist, One with inexpressible completeness,
      sanity, beauty,	      sanity, beauty,	      sanity, beauty,	      sanity, beauty,
  See the bent head and arms folded over the breast, the Female I see.	  See the bent head and arms folded over the breast, the Female I see.	  See the bent head and arms folded over the breast, the Female I see.	  See the bent head and arms folded over the breast, the Female I see.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  The male is not less the soul nor more, he too is in his place,	  The male is not less the soul nor more, he too is in his place,	  The male is not less the soul nor more, he too is in his place,	  The male is not less the soul nor more, he too is in his place,
  He too is all qualities, he is action and power,	  He too is all qualities, he is action and power,	  He too is all qualities, he is action and power,	  He too is all qualities, he is action and power,
  The flush of the known universe is in him,	  The flush of the known universe is in him,	  The flush of the known universe is in him,	  The flush of the known universe is in him,
  Scorn becomes him well, and appetite and defiance become him well,	  Scorn becomes him well, and appetite and defiance become him well,	  Scorn becomes him well, and appetite and defiance become him well,	  Scorn becomes him well, and appetite and defiance become him well,
  The wildest largest passions, bliss that is utmost, sorrow that is	  The wildest largest passions, bliss that is utmost, sorrow that is	  The wildest largest passions, bliss that is utmost, sorrow that is	  The wildest largest passions, bliss that is utmost, sorrow that is
      utmost become him well, pride is for him,	      utmost become him well, pride is for him,	      utmost become him well, pride is for him,	      utmost become him well, pride is for him,
  The full-spread pride of man is calming and excellent to the soul,	  The full-spread pride of man is calming and excellent to the soul,	  The full-spread pride of man is calming and excellent to the soul,	  The full-spread pride of man is calming and excellent to the soul,
  Knowledge becomes him, he likes it always, he brings every thing to	  Knowledge becomes him, he likes it always, he brings every thing to	  Knowledge becomes him, he likes it always, he brings every thing to	  Knowledge becomes him, he likes it always, he brings every thing to
      the test of himself,	      the test of himself,	      the test of himself,	      the test of himself,
  Whatever the survey, whatever the sea and the sail he strikes	  Whatever the survey, whatever the sea and the sail he strikes	  Whatever the survey, whatever the sea and the sail he strikes	  Whatever the survey, whatever the sea and the sail he strikes
      soundings at last only here,	      soundings at last only here,	      soundings at last only here,	      soundings at last only here,
  (Where else does he strike soundings except here?)	  (Where else does he strike soundings except here?)	  (Where else does he strike soundings except here?)	  (Where else does he strike soundings except here?)
			
  The man's body is sacred and the woman's body is sacred,	  The man's body is sacred and the woman's body is sacred,	  The man's body is sacred and the woman's body is sacred,	  The man's body is sacred and the woman's body is sacred,
  No matter who it is, it is sacred--is it the meanest one in the	  No matter who it is, it is sacred--is it the meanest one in the	  No matter who it is, it is sacred--is it the meanest one in the	  No matter who it is, it is sacred--is it the meanest one in the
      laborers' gang?	      laborers' gang?	      laborers' gang?	      laborers' gang?
  Is it one of the dull-faced immigrants just landed on the wharf?	  Is it one of the dull-faced immigrants just landed on the wharf?	  Is it one of the dull-faced immigrants just landed on the wharf?	  Is it one of the dull-faced immigrants just landed on the wharf?
  Each belongs here or anywhere just as much as the well-off, just as	  Each belongs here or anywhere just as much as the well-off, just as	  Each belongs here or anywhere just as much as the well-off, just as	  Each belongs here or anywhere just as much as the well-off, just as
      much as you,	      much as you,	      much as you,	      much as you,
  Each has his or her place in the procession.	  Each has his or her place in the procession.	  Each has his or her place in the procession.	  Each has his or her place in the procession.
			
  (All is a procession,	  (All is a procession,	  (All is a procession,	  (All is a procession,
  The universe is a procession with measured and perfect motion.)	  The universe is a procession with measured and perfect motion.)	  The universe is a procession with measured and perfect motion.)	  The universe is a procession with measured and perfect motion.)
			
  Do you know so much yourself that you call the meanest ignorant?	  Do you know so much yourself that you call the meanest ignorant?	  Do you know so much yourself that you call the meanest ignorant?	  Do you know so much yourself that you call the meanest ignorant?
  Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight, and he or she has	  Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight, and he or she has	  Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight, and he or she has	  Do you suppose you have a right to a good sight, and he or she has
      no right to a sight?	      no right to a sight?	      no right to a sight?	      no right to a sight?
  Do you think matter has cohered together from its diffuse float, and	  Do you think matter has cohered together from its diffuse float, and	  Do you think matter has cohered together from its diffuse float, and	  Do you think matter has cohered together from its diffuse float, and
      the soil is on the surface, and water runs and vegetation sprouts,	      the soil is on the surface, and water runs and vegetation sprouts,	      the soil is on the surface, and water runs and vegetation sprouts,	      the soil is on the surface, and water runs and vegetation sprouts,
  For you only, and not for him and her?	  For you only, and not for him and her?	  For you only, and not for him and her?	  For you only, and not for him and her?
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  A man's body at auction,	  A man's body at auction,	  A man's body at auction,	  A man's body at auction,
  (For before the war I often go to the slave-mart and watch the sale,)	  (For before the war I often go to the slave-mart and watch the sale,)	  (For before the war I often go to the slave-mart and watch the sale,)	  (For before the war I often go to the slave-mart and watch the sale,)
  I help the auctioneer, the sloven does not half know his business.	  I help the auctioneer, the sloven does not half know his business.	  I help the auctioneer, the sloven does not half know his business.	  I help the auctioneer, the sloven does not half know his business.
			
  Gentlemen look on this wonder,	  Gentlemen look on this wonder,	  Gentlemen look on this wonder,	  Gentlemen look on this wonder,
  Whatever the bids of the bidders they cannot be high enough for it,	  Whatever the bids of the bidders they cannot be high enough for it,	  Whatever the bids of the bidders they cannot be high enough for it,	  Whatever the bids of the bidders they cannot be high enough for it,
  For it the globe lay preparing quintillions of years without one	  For it the globe lay preparing quintillions of years without one	  For it the globe lay preparing quintillions of years without one	  For it the globe lay preparing quintillions of years without one
      animal or plant,	      animal or plant,	      animal or plant,	      animal or plant,
  For it the revolving cycles truly and steadily roll'd.	  For it the revolving cycles truly and steadily roll'd.	  For it the revolving cycles truly and steadily roll'd.	  For it the revolving cycles truly and steadily roll'd.
			
  In this head the all-baffling brain,	  In this head the all-baffling brain,	  In this head the all-baffling brain,	  In this head the all-baffling brain,
  In it and below it the makings of heroes.	  In it and below it the makings of heroes.	  In it and below it the makings of heroes.	  In it and below it the makings of heroes.
			
  Examine these limbs, red, black, or white, they are cunning in	  Examine these limbs, red, black, or white, they are cunning in	  Examine these limbs, red, black, or white, they are cunning in	  Examine these limbs, red, black, or white, they are cunning in
      tendon and nerve,	      tendon and nerve,	      tendon and nerve,	      tendon and nerve,
  They shall be stript that you may see them.	  They shall be stript that you may see them.	  They shall be stript that you may see them.	  They shall be stript that you may see them.
			
  Exquisite senses, life-lit eyes, pluck, volition,	  Exquisite senses, life-lit eyes, pluck, volition,	  Exquisite senses, life-lit eyes, pluck, volition,	  Exquisite senses, life-lit eyes, pluck, volition,
  Flakes of breast-muscle, pliant backbone and neck, flesh not flabby,	  Flakes of breast-muscle, pliant backbone and neck, flesh not flabby,	  Flakes of breast-muscle, pliant backbone and neck, flesh not flabby,	  Flakes of breast-muscle, pliant backbone and neck, flesh not flabby,
      good-sized arms and legs,	      good-sized arms and legs,	      good-sized arms and legs,	      good-sized arms and legs,
  And wonders within there yet.	  And wonders within there yet.	  And wonders within there yet.	  And wonders within there yet.
			
  Within there runs blood,	  Within there runs blood,	  Within there runs blood,	  Within there runs blood,
  The same old blood! the same red-running blood!	  The same old blood! the same red-running blood!	  The same old blood! the same red-running blood!	  The same old blood! the same red-running blood!
  There swells and jets a heart, there all passions, desires,	  There swells and jets a heart, there all passions, desires,	  There swells and jets a heart, there all passions, desires,	  There swells and jets a heart, there all passions, desires,
      reachings, aspirations,	      reachings, aspirations,	      reachings, aspirations,	      reachings, aspirations,
  (Do you think they are not there because they are not express'd in	  (Do you think they are not there because they are not express'd in	  (Do you think they are not there because they are not express'd in	  (Do you think they are not there because they are not express'd in
      parlors and lecture-rooms?)	      parlors and lecture-rooms?)	      parlors and lecture-rooms?)	      parlors and lecture-rooms?)
			
  This is not only one man, this the father of those who shall be	  This is not only one man, this the father of those who shall be	  This is not only one man, this the father of those who shall be	  This is not only one man, this the father of those who shall be
      fathers in their turns,	      fathers in their turns,	      fathers in their turns,	      fathers in their turns,
  In him the start of populous states and rich republics,	  In him the start of populous states and rich republics,	  In him the start of populous states and rich republics,	  In him the start of populous states and rich republics,
  Of him countless immortal lives with countless embodiments and enjoyments.	  Of him countless immortal lives with countless embodiments and enjoyments.	  Of him countless immortal lives with countless embodiments and enjoyments.	  Of him countless immortal lives with countless embodiments and enjoyments.
			
  How do you know who shall come from the offspring of his offspring	  How do you know who shall come from the offspring of his offspring	  How do you know who shall come from the offspring of his offspring	  How do you know who shall come from the offspring of his offspring
      through the centuries?	      through the centuries?	      through the centuries?	      through the centuries?
  (Who might you find you have come from yourself, if you could trace	  (Who might you find you have come from yourself, if you could trace	  (Who might you find you have come from yourself, if you could trace	  (Who might you find you have come from yourself, if you could trace
      back through the centuries?)	      back through the centuries?)	      back through the centuries?)	      back through the centuries?)
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  A woman's body at auction,	  A woman's body at auction,	  A woman's body at auction,	  A woman's body at auction,
  She too is not only herself, she is the teeming mother of mothers,	  She too is not only herself, she is the teeming mother of mothers,	  She too is not only herself, she is the teeming mother of mothers,	  She too is not only herself, she is the teeming mother of mothers,
  She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be mates to the mothers.	  She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be mates to the mothers.	  She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be mates to the mothers.	  She is the bearer of them that shall grow and be mates to the mothers.
			
  Have you ever loved the body of a woman?	  Have you ever loved the body of a woman?	  Have you ever loved the body of a woman?	  Have you ever loved the body of a woman?
  Have you ever loved the body of a man?	  Have you ever loved the body of a man?	  Have you ever loved the body of a man?	  Have you ever loved the body of a man?
  Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all in all nations	  Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all in all nations	  Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all in all nations	  Do you not see that these are exactly the same to all in all nations
      and times all over the earth?	      and times all over the earth?	      and times all over the earth?	      and times all over the earth?
			
  If any thing is sacred the human body is sacred,	  If any thing is sacred the human body is sacred,	  If any thing is sacred the human body is sacred,	  If any thing is sacred the human body is sacred,
  And the glory and sweet of a man is the token of manhood untainted,	  And the glory and sweet of a man is the token of manhood untainted,	  And the glory and sweet of a man is the token of manhood untainted,	  And the glory and sweet of a man is the token of manhood untainted,
  And in man or woman a clean, strong, firm-fibred body, is more	  And in man or woman a clean, strong, firm-fibred body, is more	  And in man or woman a clean, strong, firm-fibred body, is more	  And in man or woman a clean, strong, firm-fibred body, is more
      beautiful than the most beautiful face.	      beautiful than the most beautiful face.	      beautiful than the most beautiful face.	      beautiful than the most beautiful face.
			
  Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live body? or the fool	  Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live body? or the fool	  Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live body? or the fool	  Have you seen the fool that corrupted his own live body? or the fool
      that corrupted her own live body?	      that corrupted her own live body?	      that corrupted her own live body?	      that corrupted her own live body?
  For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot conceal themselves.	  For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot conceal themselves.	  For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot conceal themselves.	  For they do not conceal themselves, and cannot conceal themselves.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  O my body! I dare not desert the likes of you in other men and	  O my body! I dare not desert the likes of you in other men and	  O my body! I dare not desert the likes of you in other men and	  O my body! I dare not desert the likes of you in other men and
      women, nor the likes of the parts of you,	      women, nor the likes of the parts of you,	      women, nor the likes of the parts of you,	      women, nor the likes of the parts of you,
  I believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the likes of	  I believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the likes of	  I believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the likes of	  I believe the likes of you are to stand or fall with the likes of
      the soul, (and that they are the soul,)	      the soul, (and that they are the soul,)	      the soul, (and that they are the soul,)	      the soul, (and that they are the soul,)
  I believe the likes of you shall stand or fall with my poems, and	  I believe the likes of you shall stand or fall with my poems, and	  I believe the likes of you shall stand or fall with my poems, and	  I believe the likes of you shall stand or fall with my poems, and
      that they are my poems,	      that they are my poems,	      that they are my poems,	      that they are my poems,
  Man's, woman's, child, youth's, wife's, husband's, mother's,	  Man's, woman's, child, youth's, wife's, husband's, mother's,	  Man's, woman's, child, youth's, wife's, husband's, mother's,	  Man's, woman's, child, youth's, wife's, husband's, mother's,
      father's, young man's, young woman's poems,	      father's, young man's, young woman's poems,	      father's, young man's, young woman's poems,	      father's, young man's, young woman's poems,
  Head, neck, hair, ears, drop and tympan of the ears,	  Head, neck, hair, ears, drop and tympan of the ears,	  Head, neck, hair, ears, drop and tympan of the ears,	  Head, neck, hair, ears, drop and tympan of the ears,
  Eyes, eye-fringes, iris of the eye, eyebrows, and the waking or	  Eyes, eye-fringes, iris of the eye, eyebrows, and the waking or	  Eyes, eye-fringes, iris of the eye, eyebrows, and the waking or	  Eyes, eye-fringes, iris of the eye, eyebrows, and the waking or
      sleeping of the lids,	      sleeping of the lids,	      sleeping of the lids,	      sleeping of the lids,
  Mouth, tongue, lips, teeth, roof of the mouth, jaws, and the jaw-hinges,	  Mouth, tongue, lips, teeth, roof of the mouth, jaws, and the jaw-hinges,	  Mouth, tongue, lips, teeth, roof of the mouth, jaws, and the jaw-hinges,	  Mouth, tongue, lips, teeth, roof of the mouth, jaws, and the jaw-hinges,
  Nose, nostrils of the nose, and the partition,	  Nose, nostrils of the nose, and the partition,	  Nose, nostrils of the nose, and the partition,	  Nose, nostrils of the nose, and the partition,
  Cheeks, temples, forehead, chin, throat, back of the neck, neck-slue,	  Cheeks, temples, forehead, chin, throat, back of the neck, neck-slue,	  Cheeks, temples, forehead, chin, throat, back of the neck, neck-slue,	  Cheeks, temples, forehead, chin, throat, back of the neck, neck-slue,
  Strong shoulders, manly beard, scapula, hind-shoulders, and the	  Strong shoulders, manly beard, scapula, hind-shoulders, and the	  Strong shoulders, manly beard, scapula, hind-shoulders, and the	  Strong shoulders, manly beard, scapula, hind-shoulders, and the
      ample side-round of the chest,	      ample side-round of the chest,	      ample side-round of the chest,	      ample side-round of the chest,
  Upper-arm, armpit, elbow-socket, lower-arm, arm-sinews, arm-bones,	  Upper-arm, armpit, elbow-socket, lower-arm, arm-sinews, arm-bones,	  Upper-arm, armpit, elbow-socket, lower-arm, arm-sinews, arm-bones,	  Upper-arm, armpit, elbow-socket, lower-arm, arm-sinews, arm-bones,
  Wrist and wrist-joints, hand, palm, knuckles, thumb, forefinger,	  Wrist and wrist-joints, hand, palm, knuckles, thumb, forefinger,	  Wrist and wrist-joints, hand, palm, knuckles, thumb, forefinger,	  Wrist and wrist-joints, hand, palm, knuckles, thumb, forefinger,
      finger-joints, finger-nails,	      finger-joints, finger-nails,	      finger-joints, finger-nails,	      finger-joints, finger-nails,
  Broad breast-front, curling hair of the breast, breast-bone, breast-side,	  Broad breast-front, curling hair of the breast, breast-bone, breast-side,	  Broad breast-front, curling hair of the breast, breast-bone, breast-side,	  Broad breast-front, curling hair of the breast, breast-bone, breast-side,
  Ribs, belly, backbone, joints of the backbone,	  Ribs, belly, backbone, joints of the backbone,	  Ribs, belly, backbone, joints of the backbone,	  Ribs, belly, backbone, joints of the backbone,
  Hips, hip-sockets, hip-strength, inward and outward round,	  Hips, hip-sockets, hip-strength, inward and outward round,	  Hips, hip-sockets, hip-strength, inward and outward round,	  Hips, hip-sockets, hip-strength, inward and outward round,
      man-balls, man-root,	      man-balls, man-root,	      man-balls, man-root,	      man-balls, man-root,
  Strong set of thighs, well carrying the trunk above,	  Strong set of thighs, well carrying the trunk above,	  Strong set of thighs, well carrying the trunk above,	  Strong set of thighs, well carrying the trunk above,
  Leg-fibres, knee, knee-pan, upper-leg, under-leg,	  Leg-fibres, knee, knee-pan, upper-leg, under-leg,	  Leg-fibres, knee, knee-pan, upper-leg, under-leg,	  Leg-fibres, knee, knee-pan, upper-leg, under-leg,
  Ankles, instep, foot-ball, toes, toe-joints, the heel;	  Ankles, instep, foot-ball, toes, toe-joints, the heel;	  Ankles, instep, foot-ball, toes, toe-joints, the heel;	  Ankles, instep, foot-ball, toes, toe-joints, the heel;
  All attitudes, all the shapeliness, all the belongings of my or your	  All attitudes, all the shapeliness, all the belongings of my or your	  All attitudes, all the shapeliness, all the belongings of my or your	  All attitudes, all the shapeliness, all the belongings of my or your
      body or of any one's body, male or female,	      body or of any one's body, male or female,	      body or of any one's body, male or female,	      body or of any one's body, male or female,
  The lung-sponges, the stomach-sac, the bowels sweet and clean,	  The lung-sponges, the stomach-sac, the bowels sweet and clean,	  The lung-sponges, the stomach-sac, the bowels sweet and clean,	  The lung-sponges, the stomach-sac, the bowels sweet and clean,
  The brain in its folds inside the skull-frame,	  The brain in its folds inside the skull-frame,	  The brain in its folds inside the skull-frame,	  The brain in its folds inside the skull-frame,
  Sympathies, heart-valves, palate-valves, sexuality, maternity,	  Sympathies, heart-valves, palate-valves, sexuality, maternity,	  Sympathies, heart-valves, palate-valves, sexuality, maternity,	  Sympathies, heart-valves, palate-valves, sexuality, maternity,
  Womanhood, and all that is a woman, and the man that comes from woman,	  Womanhood, and all that is a woman, and the man that comes from woman,	  Womanhood, and all that is a woman, and the man that comes from woman,	  Womanhood, and all that is a woman, and the man that comes from woman,
  The womb, the teats, nipples, breast-milk, tears, laughter, weeping,	  The womb, the teats, nipples, breast-milk, tears, laughter, weeping,	  The womb, the teats, nipples, breast-milk, tears, laughter, weeping,	  The womb, the teats, nipples, breast-milk, tears, laughter, weeping,
      love-looks, love-perturbations and risings,	      love-looks, love-perturbations and risings,	      love-looks, love-perturbations and risings,	      love-looks, love-perturbations and risings,
  The voice, articulation, language, whispering, shouting aloud,	  The voice, articulation, language, whispering, shouting aloud,	  The voice, articulation, language, whispering, shouting aloud,	  The voice, articulation, language, whispering, shouting aloud,
  Food, drink, pulse, digestion, sweat, sleep, walking, swimming,	  Food, drink, pulse, digestion, sweat, sleep, walking, swimming,	  Food, drink, pulse, digestion, sweat, sleep, walking, swimming,	  Food, drink, pulse, digestion, sweat, sleep, walking, swimming,
  Poise on the hips, leaping, reclining, embracing, arm-curving and tightening,	  Poise on the hips, leaping, reclining, embracing, arm-curving and tightening,	  Poise on the hips, leaping, reclining, embracing, arm-curving and tightening,	  Poise on the hips, leaping, reclining, embracing, arm-curving and tightening,
  The continual changes of the flex of the mouth, and around the eyes,	  The continual changes of the flex of the mouth, and around the eyes,	  The continual changes of the flex of the mouth, and around the eyes,	  The continual changes of the flex of the mouth, and around the eyes,
  The skin, the sunburnt shade, freckles, hair,	  The skin, the sunburnt shade, freckles, hair,	  The skin, the sunburnt shade, freckles, hair,	  The skin, the sunburnt shade, freckles, hair,
  The curious sympathy one feels when feeling with the hand the naked	  The curious sympathy one feels when feeling with the hand the naked	  The curious sympathy one feels when feeling with the hand the naked	  The curious sympathy one feels when feeling with the hand the naked
      meat of the body,	      meat of the body,	      meat of the body,	      meat of the body,
  The circling rivers the breath, and breathing it in and out,	  The circling rivers the breath, and breathing it in and out,	  The circling rivers the breath, and breathing it in and out,	  The circling rivers the breath, and breathing it in and out,
  The beauty of the waist, and thence of the hips, and thence downward	  The beauty of the waist, and thence of the hips, and thence downward	  The beauty of the waist, and thence of the hips, and thence downward	  The beauty of the waist, and thence of the hips, and thence downward
      toward the knees,	      toward the knees,	      toward the knees,	      toward the knees,
  The thin red jellies within you or within me, the bones and the	  The thin red jellies within you or within me, the bones and the	  The thin red jellies within you or within me, the bones and the	  The thin red jellies within you or within me, the bones and the
      marrow in the bones,	      marrow in the bones,	      marrow in the bones,	      marrow in the bones,
  The exquisite realization of health;	  The exquisite realization of health;	  The exquisite realization of health;	  The exquisite realization of health;
  O I say these are not the parts and poems of the body only, but of the soul,	  O I say these are not the parts and poems of the body only, but of the soul,	  O I say these are not the parts and poems of the body only, but of the soul,	  O I say these are not the parts and poems of the body only, but of the soul,
  O I say now these are the soul!	  O I say now these are the soul!	  O I say now these are the soul!	  O I say now these are the soul!
			
			
			
			
A Woman Waits for Me	A Woman Waits for Me	A Woman Waits for Me	A Woman Waits for Me
			
  A woman waits for me, she contains all, nothing is lacking,	  A woman waits for me, she contains all, nothing is lacking,	  A woman waits for me, she contains all, nothing is lacking,	  A woman waits for me, she contains all, nothing is lacking,
  Yet all were lacking if sex were lacking, or if the moisture of the	  Yet all were lacking if sex were lacking, or if the moisture of the	  Yet all were lacking if sex were lacking, or if the moisture of the	  Yet all were lacking if sex were lacking, or if the moisture of the
      right man were lacking.	      right man were lacking.	      right man were lacking.	      right man were lacking.
			
  Sex contains all, bodies, souls,	  Sex contains all, bodies, souls,	  Sex contains all, bodies, souls,	  Sex contains all, bodies, souls,
  Meanings, proofs, purities, delicacies, results, promulgations,	  Meanings, proofs, purities, delicacies, results, promulgations,	  Meanings, proofs, purities, delicacies, results, promulgations,	  Meanings, proofs, purities, delicacies, results, promulgations,
  Songs, commands, health, pride, the maternal mystery, the seminal milk,	  Songs, commands, health, pride, the maternal mystery, the seminal milk,	  Songs, commands, health, pride, the maternal mystery, the seminal milk,	  Songs, commands, health, pride, the maternal mystery, the seminal milk,
  All hopes, benefactions, bestowals, all the passions, loves,	  All hopes, benefactions, bestowals, all the passions, loves,	  All hopes, benefactions, bestowals, all the passions, loves,	  All hopes, benefactions, bestowals, all the passions, loves,
      beauties, delights of the earth,	      beauties, delights of the earth,	      beauties, delights of the earth,	      beauties, delights of the earth,
  All the governments, judges, gods, follow'd persons of the earth,	  All the governments, judges, gods, follow'd persons of the earth,	  All the governments, judges, gods, follow'd persons of the earth,	  All the governments, judges, gods, follow'd persons of the earth,
  These are contain'd in sex as parts of itself and justifications of itself.	  These are contain'd in sex as parts of itself and justifications of itself.	  These are contain'd in sex as parts of itself and justifications of itself.	  These are contain'd in sex as parts of itself and justifications of itself.
			
  Without shame the man I like knows and avows the deliciousness of his sex,	  Without shame the man I like knows and avows the deliciousness of his sex,	  Without shame the man I like knows and avows the deliciousness of his sex,	  Without shame the man I like knows and avows the deliciousness of his sex,
  Without shame the woman I like knows and avows hers.	  Without shame the woman I like knows and avows hers.	  Without shame the woman I like knows and avows hers.	  Without shame the woman I like knows and avows hers.
			
  Now I will dismiss myself from impassive women,	  Now I will dismiss myself from impassive women,	  Now I will dismiss myself from impassive women,	  Now I will dismiss myself from impassive women,
  I will go stay with her who waits for me, and with those women that	  I will go stay with her who waits for me, and with those women that	  I will go stay with her who waits for me, and with those women that	  I will go stay with her who waits for me, and with those women that
      are warm-blooded and sufficient for me,	      are warm-blooded and sufficient for me,	      are warm-blooded and sufficient for me,	      are warm-blooded and sufficient for me,
  I see that they understand me and do not deny me,	  I see that they understand me and do not deny me,	  I see that they understand me and do not deny me,	  I see that they understand me and do not deny me,
  I see that they are worthy of me, I will be the robust husband of	  I see that they are worthy of me, I will be the robust husband of	  I see that they are worthy of me, I will be the robust husband of	  I see that they are worthy of me, I will be the robust husband of
      those women.	      those women.	      those women.	      those women.
			
  They are not one jot less than I am,	  They are not one jot less than I am,	  They are not one jot less than I am,	  They are not one jot less than I am,
  They are tann'd in the face by shining suns and blowing winds,	  They are tann'd in the face by shining suns and blowing winds,	  They are tann'd in the face by shining suns and blowing winds,	  They are tann'd in the face by shining suns and blowing winds,
  Their flesh has the old divine suppleness and strength,	  Their flesh has the old divine suppleness and strength,	  Their flesh has the old divine suppleness and strength,	  Their flesh has the old divine suppleness and strength,
  They know how to swim, row, ride, wrestle, shoot, run, strike,	  They know how to swim, row, ride, wrestle, shoot, run, strike,	  They know how to swim, row, ride, wrestle, shoot, run, strike,	  They know how to swim, row, ride, wrestle, shoot, run, strike,
      retreat, advance, resist, defend themselves,	      retreat, advance, resist, defend themselves,	      retreat, advance, resist, defend themselves,	      retreat, advance, resist, defend themselves,
  They are ultimate in their own right--they are calm, clear,	  They are ultimate in their own right--they are calm, clear,	  They are ultimate in their own right--they are calm, clear,	  They are ultimate in their own right--they are calm, clear,
      well-possess'd of themselves.	      well-possess'd of themselves.	      well-possess'd of themselves.	      well-possess'd of themselves.
			
  I draw you close to me, you women,	  I draw you close to me, you women,	  I draw you close to me, you women,	  I draw you close to me, you women,
  I cannot let you go, I would do you good,	  I cannot let you go, I would do you good,	  I cannot let you go, I would do you good,	  I cannot let you go, I would do you good,
  I am for you, and you are for me, not only for our own sake, but for	  I am for you, and you are for me, not only for our own sake, but for	  I am for you, and you are for me, not only for our own sake, but for	  I am for you, and you are for me, not only for our own sake, but for
      others' sakes,	      others' sakes,	      others' sakes,	      others' sakes,
  Envelop'd in you sleep greater heroes and bards,	  Envelop'd in you sleep greater heroes and bards,	  Envelop'd in you sleep greater heroes and bards,	  Envelop'd in you sleep greater heroes and bards,
  They refuse to awake at the touch of any man but me.	  They refuse to awake at the touch of any man but me.	  They refuse to awake at the touch of any man but me.	  They refuse to awake at the touch of any man but me.
			
  It is I, you women, I make my way,	  It is I, you women, I make my way,	  It is I, you women, I make my way,	  It is I, you women, I make my way,
  I am stern, acrid, large, undissuadable, but I love you,	  I am stern, acrid, large, undissuadable, but I love you,	  I am stern, acrid, large, undissuadable, but I love you,	  I am stern, acrid, large, undissuadable, but I love you,
  I do not hurt you any more than is necessary for you,	  I do not hurt you any more than is necessary for you,	  I do not hurt you any more than is necessary for you,	  I do not hurt you any more than is necessary for you,
  I pour the stuff to start sons and daughters fit for these States, I	  I pour the stuff to start sons and daughters fit for these States, I	  I pour the stuff to start sons and daughters fit for these States, I	  I pour the stuff to start sons and daughters fit for these States, I
      press with slow rude muscle,	      press with slow rude muscle,	      press with slow rude muscle,	      press with slow rude muscle,
  I brace myself effectually, I listen to no entreaties,	  I brace myself effectually, I listen to no entreaties,	  I brace myself effectually, I listen to no entreaties,	  I brace myself effectually, I listen to no entreaties,
  I dare not withdraw till I deposit what has so long accumulated within me.	  I dare not withdraw till I deposit what has so long accumulated within me.	  I dare not withdraw till I deposit what has so long accumulated within me.	  I dare not withdraw till I deposit what has so long accumulated within me.
			
  Through you I drain the pent-up rivers of myself,	  Through you I drain the pent-up rivers of myself,	  Through you I drain the pent-up rivers of myself,	  Through you I drain the pent-up rivers of myself,
  In you I wrap a thousand onward years,	  In you I wrap a thousand onward years,	  In you I wrap a thousand onward years,	  In you I wrap a thousand onward years,
  On you I graft the grafts of the best-beloved of me and America,	  On you I graft the grafts of the best-beloved of me and America,	  On you I graft the grafts of the best-beloved of me and America,	  On you I graft the grafts of the best-beloved of me and America,
  The drops I distil upon you shall grow fierce and athletic girls,	  The drops I distil upon you shall grow fierce and athletic girls,	  The drops I distil upon you shall grow fierce and athletic girls,	  The drops I distil upon you shall grow fierce and athletic girls,
      new artists, musicians, and singers,	      new artists, musicians, and singers,	      new artists, musicians, and singers,	      new artists, musicians, and singers,
  The babes I beget upon you are to beget babes in their turn,	  The babes I beget upon you are to beget babes in their turn,	  The babes I beget upon you are to beget babes in their turn,	  The babes I beget upon you are to beget babes in their turn,
  I shall demand perfect men and women out of my love-spendings,	  I shall demand perfect men and women out of my love-spendings,	  I shall demand perfect men and women out of my love-spendings,	  I shall demand perfect men and women out of my love-spendings,
  I shall expect them to interpenetrate with others, as I and you	  I shall expect them to interpenetrate with others, as I and you	  I shall expect them to interpenetrate with others, as I and you	  I shall expect them to interpenetrate with others, as I and you
      inter-penetrate now,	      inter-penetrate now,	      inter-penetrate now,	      inter-penetrate now,
  I shall count on the fruits of the gushing showers of them, as I	  I shall count on the fruits of the gushing showers of them, as I	  I shall count on the fruits of the gushing showers of them, as I	  I shall count on the fruits of the gushing showers of them, as I
      count on the fruits of the gushing showers I give now,	      count on the fruits of the gushing showers I give now,	      count on the fruits of the gushing showers I give now,	      count on the fruits of the gushing showers I give now,
  I shall look for loving crops from the birth, life, death,	  I shall look for loving crops from the birth, life, death,	  I shall look for loving crops from the birth, life, death,	  I shall look for loving crops from the birth, life, death,
      immortality, I plant so lovingly now.	      immortality, I plant so lovingly now.	      immortality, I plant so lovingly now.	      immortality, I plant so lovingly now.
			
			
			
			
Spontaneous Me	Spontaneous Me	Spontaneous Me	Spontaneous Me
			
  Spontaneous me, Nature,	  Spontaneous me, Nature,	  Spontaneous me, Nature,	  Spontaneous me, Nature,
  The loving day, the mounting sun, the friend I am happy with,	  The loving day, the mounting sun, the friend I am happy with,	  The loving day, the mounting sun, the friend I am happy with,	  The loving day, the mounting sun, the friend I am happy with,
  The arm of my friend hanging idly over my shoulder,	  The arm of my friend hanging idly over my shoulder,	  The arm of my friend hanging idly over my shoulder,	  The arm of my friend hanging idly over my shoulder,
  The hillside whiten'd with blossoms of the mountain ash,	  The hillside whiten'd with blossoms of the mountain ash,	  The hillside whiten'd with blossoms of the mountain ash,	  The hillside whiten'd with blossoms of the mountain ash,
  The same late in autumn, the hues of red, yellow, drab, purple, and	  The same late in autumn, the hues of red, yellow, drab, purple, and	  The same late in autumn, the hues of red, yellow, drab, purple, and	  The same late in autumn, the hues of red, yellow, drab, purple, and
      light and dark green,	      light and dark green,	      light and dark green,	      light and dark green,
  The rich coverlet of the grass, animals and birds, the private	  The rich coverlet of the grass, animals and birds, the private	  The rich coverlet of the grass, animals and birds, the private	  The rich coverlet of the grass, animals and birds, the private
      untrimm'd bank, the primitive apples, the pebble-stones,	      untrimm'd bank, the primitive apples, the pebble-stones,	      untrimm'd bank, the primitive apples, the pebble-stones,	      untrimm'd bank, the primitive apples, the pebble-stones,
  Beautiful dripping fragments, the negligent list of one after	  Beautiful dripping fragments, the negligent list of one after	  Beautiful dripping fragments, the negligent list of one after	  Beautiful dripping fragments, the negligent list of one after
      another as I happen to call them to me or think of them,	      another as I happen to call them to me or think of them,	      another as I happen to call them to me or think of them,	      another as I happen to call them to me or think of them,
  The real poems, (what we call poems being merely pictures,)	  The real poems, (what we call poems being merely pictures,)	  The real poems, (what we call poems being merely pictures,)	  The real poems, (what we call poems being merely pictures,)
  The poems of the privacy of the night, and of men like me,	  The poems of the privacy of the night, and of men like me,	  The poems of the privacy of the night, and of men like me,	  The poems of the privacy of the night, and of men like me,
  This poem drooping shy and unseen that I always carry, and that all	  This poem drooping shy and unseen that I always carry, and that all	  This poem drooping shy and unseen that I always carry, and that all	  This poem drooping shy and unseen that I always carry, and that all
      men carry,	      men carry,	      men carry,	      men carry,
  (Know once for all, avow'd on purpose, wherever are men like me, are	  (Know once for all, avow'd on purpose, wherever are men like me, are	  (Know once for all, avow'd on purpose, wherever are men like me, are	  (Know once for all, avow'd on purpose, wherever are men like me, are
      our lusty lurking masculine poems,)	      our lusty lurking masculine poems,)	      our lusty lurking masculine poems,)	      our lusty lurking masculine poems,)
  Love-thoughts, love-juice, love-odor, love-yielding, love-climbers,	  Love-thoughts, love-juice, love-odor, love-yielding, love-climbers,	  Love-thoughts, love-juice, love-odor, love-yielding, love-climbers,	  Love-thoughts, love-juice, love-odor, love-yielding, love-climbers,
      and the climbing sap,	      and the climbing sap,	      and the climbing sap,	      and the climbing sap,
  Arms and hands of love, lips of love, phallic thumb of love, breasts	  Arms and hands of love, lips of love, phallic thumb of love, breasts	  Arms and hands of love, lips of love, phallic thumb of love, breasts	  Arms and hands of love, lips of love, phallic thumb of love, breasts
      of love, bellies press'd and glued together with love,	      of love, bellies press'd and glued together with love,	      of love, bellies press'd and glued together with love,	      of love, bellies press'd and glued together with love,
  Earth of chaste love, life that is only life after love,	  Earth of chaste love, life that is only life after love,	  Earth of chaste love, life that is only life after love,	  Earth of chaste love, life that is only life after love,
  The body of my love, the body of the woman I love, the body of the	  The body of my love, the body of the woman I love, the body of the	  The body of my love, the body of the woman I love, the body of the	  The body of my love, the body of the woman I love, the body of the
      man, the body of the earth,	      man, the body of the earth,	      man, the body of the earth,	      man, the body of the earth,
  Soft forenoon airs that blow from the south-west,	  Soft forenoon airs that blow from the south-west,	  Soft forenoon airs that blow from the south-west,	  Soft forenoon airs that blow from the south-west,
  The hairy wild-bee that murmurs and hankers up and down, that gripes the	  The hairy wild-bee that murmurs and hankers up and down, that gripes the	  The hairy wild-bee that murmurs and hankers up and down, that gripes the	  The hairy wild-bee that murmurs and hankers up and down, that gripes the
      full-grown lady-flower, curves upon her with amorous firm legs, takes	      full-grown lady-flower, curves upon her with amorous firm legs, takes	      full-grown lady-flower, curves upon her with amorous firm legs, takes	      full-grown lady-flower, curves upon her with amorous firm legs, takes
      his will of her, and holds himself tremulous and tight till he is	      his will of her, and holds himself tremulous and tight till he is	      his will of her, and holds himself tremulous and tight till he is	      his will of her, and holds himself tremulous and tight till he is
      satisfied;	      satisfied;	      satisfied;	      satisfied;
  The wet of woods through the early hours,	  The wet of woods through the early hours,	  The wet of woods through the early hours,	  The wet of woods through the early hours,
  Two sleepers at night lying close together as they sleep, one with	  Two sleepers at night lying close together as they sleep, one with	  Two sleepers at night lying close together as they sleep, one with	  Two sleepers at night lying close together as they sleep, one with
      an arm slanting down across and below the waist of the other,	      an arm slanting down across and below the waist of the other,	      an arm slanting down across and below the waist of the other,	      an arm slanting down across and below the waist of the other,
  The smell of apples, aromas from crush'd sage-plant, mint, birch-bark,	  The smell of apples, aromas from crush'd sage-plant, mint, birch-bark,	  The smell of apples, aromas from crush'd sage-plant, mint, birch-bark,	  The smell of apples, aromas from crush'd sage-plant, mint, birch-bark,
  The boy's longings, the glow and pressure as he confides to me what	  The boy's longings, the glow and pressure as he confides to me what	  The boy's longings, the glow and pressure as he confides to me what	  The boy's longings, the glow and pressure as he confides to me what
      he was dreaming,	      he was dreaming,	      he was dreaming,	      he was dreaming,
  The dead leaf whirling its spiral whirl and falling still and	  The dead leaf whirling its spiral whirl and falling still and	  The dead leaf whirling its spiral whirl and falling still and	  The dead leaf whirling its spiral whirl and falling still and
      content to the ground,	      content to the ground,	      content to the ground,	      content to the ground,
  The no-form'd stings that sights, people, objects, sting me with,	  The no-form'd stings that sights, people, objects, sting me with,	  The no-form'd stings that sights, people, objects, sting me with,	  The no-form'd stings that sights, people, objects, sting me with,
  The hubb'd sting of myself, stinging me as much as it ever can any	  The hubb'd sting of myself, stinging me as much as it ever can any	  The hubb'd sting of myself, stinging me as much as it ever can any	  The hubb'd sting of myself, stinging me as much as it ever can any
      one,	      one,	      one,	      one,
  The sensitive, orbic, underlapp'd brothers, that only privileged	  The sensitive, orbic, underlapp'd brothers, that only privileged	  The sensitive, orbic, underlapp'd brothers, that only privileged	  The sensitive, orbic, underlapp'd brothers, that only privileged
      feelers may be intimate where they are,	      feelers may be intimate where they are,	      feelers may be intimate where they are,	      feelers may be intimate where they are,
  The curious roamer the hand roaming all over the body, the bashful	  The curious roamer the hand roaming all over the body, the bashful	  The curious roamer the hand roaming all over the body, the bashful	  The curious roamer the hand roaming all over the body, the bashful
      withdrawing of flesh where the fingers soothingly pause and	      withdrawing of flesh where the fingers soothingly pause and	      withdrawing of flesh where the fingers soothingly pause and	      withdrawing of flesh where the fingers soothingly pause and
      edge themselves,	      edge themselves,	      edge themselves,	      edge themselves,
  The limpid liquid within the young man,	  The limpid liquid within the young man,	  The limpid liquid within the young man,	  The limpid liquid within the young man,
  The vex'd corrosion so pensive and so painful,	  The vex'd corrosion so pensive and so painful,	  The vex'd corrosion so pensive and so painful,	  The vex'd corrosion so pensive and so painful,
  The torment, the irritable tide that will not be at rest,	  The torment, the irritable tide that will not be at rest,	  The torment, the irritable tide that will not be at rest,	  The torment, the irritable tide that will not be at rest,
  The like of the same I feel, the like of the same in others,	  The like of the same I feel, the like of the same in others,	  The like of the same I feel, the like of the same in others,	  The like of the same I feel, the like of the same in others,
  The young man that flushes and flushes, and the young woman that	  The young man that flushes and flushes, and the young woman that	  The young man that flushes and flushes, and the young woman that	  The young man that flushes and flushes, and the young woman that
      flushes and flushes,	      flushes and flushes,	      flushes and flushes,	      flushes and flushes,
  The young man that wakes deep at night, the hot hand seeking to	  The young man that wakes deep at night, the hot hand seeking to	  The young man that wakes deep at night, the hot hand seeking to	  The young man that wakes deep at night, the hot hand seeking to
      repress what would master him,	      repress what would master him,	      repress what would master him,	      repress what would master him,
  The mystic amorous night, the strange half-welcome pangs, visions, sweats,	  The mystic amorous night, the strange half-welcome pangs, visions, sweats,	  The mystic amorous night, the strange half-welcome pangs, visions, sweats,	  The mystic amorous night, the strange half-welcome pangs, visions, sweats,
  The pulse pounding through palms and trembling encircling fingers,	  The pulse pounding through palms and trembling encircling fingers,	  The pulse pounding through palms and trembling encircling fingers,	  The pulse pounding through palms and trembling encircling fingers,
      the young man all color'd, red, ashamed, angry;	      the young man all color'd, red, ashamed, angry;	      the young man all color'd, red, ashamed, angry;	      the young man all color'd, red, ashamed, angry;
  The souse upon me of my lover the sea, as I lie willing and naked,	  The souse upon me of my lover the sea, as I lie willing and naked,	  The souse upon me of my lover the sea, as I lie willing and naked,	  The souse upon me of my lover the sea, as I lie willing and naked,
  The merriment of the twin babes that crawl over the grass in the	  The merriment of the twin babes that crawl over the grass in the	  The merriment of the twin babes that crawl over the grass in the	  The merriment of the twin babes that crawl over the grass in the
      sun, the mother never turning her vigilant eyes from them,	      sun, the mother never turning her vigilant eyes from them,	      sun, the mother never turning her vigilant eyes from them,	      sun, the mother never turning her vigilant eyes from them,
  The walnut-trunk, the walnut-husks, and the ripening or ripen'd	  The walnut-trunk, the walnut-husks, and the ripening or ripen'd	  The walnut-trunk, the walnut-husks, and the ripening or ripen'd	  The walnut-trunk, the walnut-husks, and the ripening or ripen'd
      long-round walnuts,	      long-round walnuts,	      long-round walnuts,	      long-round walnuts,
  The continence of vegetables, birds, animals,	  The continence of vegetables, birds, animals,	  The continence of vegetables, birds, animals,	  The continence of vegetables, birds, animals,
  The consequent meanness of me should I skulk or find myself indecent,	  The consequent meanness of me should I skulk or find myself indecent,	  The consequent meanness of me should I skulk or find myself indecent,	  The consequent meanness of me should I skulk or find myself indecent,
      while birds and animals never once skulk or find themselves indecent,	      while birds and animals never once skulk or find themselves indecent,	      while birds and animals never once skulk or find themselves indecent,	      while birds and animals never once skulk or find themselves indecent,
  The great chastity of paternity, to match the great chastity of maternity,	  The great chastity of paternity, to match the great chastity of maternity,	  The great chastity of paternity, to match the great chastity of maternity,	  The great chastity of paternity, to match the great chastity of maternity,
  The oath of procreation I have sworn, my Adamic and fresh daughters,	  The oath of procreation I have sworn, my Adamic and fresh daughters,	  The oath of procreation I have sworn, my Adamic and fresh daughters,	  The oath of procreation I have sworn, my Adamic and fresh daughters,
  The greed that eats me day and night with hungry gnaw, till I saturate	  The greed that eats me day and night with hungry gnaw, till I saturate	  The greed that eats me day and night with hungry gnaw, till I saturate	  The greed that eats me day and night with hungry gnaw, till I saturate
      what shall produce boys to fill my place when I am through,	      what shall produce boys to fill my place when I am through,	      what shall produce boys to fill my place when I am through,	      what shall produce boys to fill my place when I am through,
  The wholesome relief, repose, content,	  The wholesome relief, repose, content,	  The wholesome relief, repose, content,	  The wholesome relief, repose, content,
  And this bunch pluck'd at random from myself,	  And this bunch pluck'd at random from myself,	  And this bunch pluck'd at random from myself,	  And this bunch pluck'd at random from myself,
  It has done its work--I toss it carelessly to fall where it may.	  It has done its work--I toss it carelessly to fall where it may.	  It has done its work--I toss it carelessly to fall where it may.	  It has done its work--I toss it carelessly to fall where it may.
			
			
			
			
One Hour to Madness and Joy	One Hour to Madness and Joy	One Hour to Madness and Joy	One Hour to Madness and Joy
			
  One hour to madness and joy! O furious! O confine me not!	  One hour to madness and joy! O furious! O confine me not!	  One hour to madness and joy! O furious! O confine me not!	  One hour to madness and joy! O furious! O confine me not!
  (What is this that frees me so in storms?	  (What is this that frees me so in storms?	  (What is this that frees me so in storms?	  (What is this that frees me so in storms?
  What do my shouts amid lightnings and raging winds mean?)	  What do my shouts amid lightnings and raging winds mean?)	  What do my shouts amid lightnings and raging winds mean?)	  What do my shouts amid lightnings and raging winds mean?)
  O to drink the mystic deliria deeper than any other man!	  O to drink the mystic deliria deeper than any other man!	  O to drink the mystic deliria deeper than any other man!	  O to drink the mystic deliria deeper than any other man!
  O savage and tender achings! (I bequeath them to you my children,	  O savage and tender achings! (I bequeath them to you my children,	  O savage and tender achings! (I bequeath them to you my children,	  O savage and tender achings! (I bequeath them to you my children,
  I tell them to you, for reasons, O bridegroom and bride.)	  I tell them to you, for reasons, O bridegroom and bride.)	  I tell them to you, for reasons, O bridegroom and bride.)	  I tell them to you, for reasons, O bridegroom and bride.)
			
  O to be yielded to you whoever you are, and you to be yielded to me	  O to be yielded to you whoever you are, and you to be yielded to me	  O to be yielded to you whoever you are, and you to be yielded to me	  O to be yielded to you whoever you are, and you to be yielded to me
      in defiance of the world!	      in defiance of the world!	      in defiance of the world!	      in defiance of the world!
  O to return to Paradise! O bashful and feminine!	  O to return to Paradise! O bashful and feminine!	  O to return to Paradise! O bashful and feminine!	  O to return to Paradise! O bashful and feminine!
  O to draw you to me, to plant on you for the first time the lips of	  O to draw you to me, to plant on you for the first time the lips of	  O to draw you to me, to plant on you for the first time the lips of	  O to draw you to me, to plant on you for the first time the lips of
      a determin'd man.	      a determin'd man.	      a determin'd man.	      a determin'd man.
			
  O the puzzle, the thrice-tied knot, the deep and dark pool, all	  O the puzzle, the thrice-tied knot, the deep and dark pool, all	  O the puzzle, the thrice-tied knot, the deep and dark pool, all	  O the puzzle, the thrice-tied knot, the deep and dark pool, all
      untied and illumin'd!	      untied and illumin'd!	      untied and illumin'd!	      untied and illumin'd!
  O to speed where there is space enough and air enough at last!	  O to speed where there is space enough and air enough at last!	  O to speed where there is space enough and air enough at last!	  O to speed where there is space enough and air enough at last!
  To be absolv'd from previous ties and conventions, I from mine and	  To be absolv'd from previous ties and conventions, I from mine and	  To be absolv'd from previous ties and conventions, I from mine and	  To be absolv'd from previous ties and conventions, I from mine and
      you from yours!	      you from yours!	      you from yours!	      you from yours!
  To find a new unthought-of nonchalance with the best of Nature!	  To find a new unthought-of nonchalance with the best of Nature!	  To find a new unthought-of nonchalance with the best of Nature!	  To find a new unthought-of nonchalance with the best of Nature!
  To have the gag remov'd from one's mouth!	  To have the gag remov'd from one's mouth!	  To have the gag remov'd from one's mouth!	  To have the gag remov'd from one's mouth!
  To have the feeling to-day or any day I am sufficient as I am.	  To have the feeling to-day or any day I am sufficient as I am.	  To have the feeling to-day or any day I am sufficient as I am.	  To have the feeling to-day or any day I am sufficient as I am.
			
  O something unprov'd! something in a trance!	  O something unprov'd! something in a trance!	  O something unprov'd! something in a trance!	  O something unprov'd! something in a trance!
  To escape utterly from others' anchors and holds!	  To escape utterly from others' anchors and holds!	  To escape utterly from others' anchors and holds!	  To escape utterly from others' anchors and holds!
  To drive free! to love free! to dash reckless and dangerous!	  To drive free! to love free! to dash reckless and dangerous!	  To drive free! to love free! to dash reckless and dangerous!	  To drive free! to love free! to dash reckless and dangerous!
  To court destruction with taunts, with invitations!	  To court destruction with taunts, with invitations!	  To court destruction with taunts, with invitations!	  To court destruction with taunts, with invitations!
  To ascend, to leap to the heavens of the love indicated to me!	  To ascend, to leap to the heavens of the love indicated to me!	  To ascend, to leap to the heavens of the love indicated to me!	  To ascend, to leap to the heavens of the love indicated to me!
  To rise thither with my inebriate soul!	  To rise thither with my inebriate soul!	  To rise thither with my inebriate soul!	  To rise thither with my inebriate soul!
  To be lost if it must be so!	  To be lost if it must be so!	  To be lost if it must be so!	  To be lost if it must be so!
  To feed the remainder of life with one hour of fulness and freedom!	  To feed the remainder of life with one hour of fulness and freedom!	  To feed the remainder of life with one hour of fulness and freedom!	  To feed the remainder of life with one hour of fulness and freedom!
  With one brief hour of madness and joy.	  With one brief hour of madness and joy.	  With one brief hour of madness and joy.	  With one brief hour of madness and joy.
			
			
			
			
Out of the Rolling Ocean the Crowd	Out of the Rolling Ocean the Crowd	Out of the Rolling Ocean the Crowd	Out of the Rolling Ocean the Crowd
			
  Out of the rolling ocean the crowd came a drop gently to me,	  Out of the rolling ocean the crowd came a drop gently to me,	  Out of the rolling ocean the crowd came a drop gently to me,	  Out of the rolling ocean the crowd came a drop gently to me,
  Whispering I love you, before long I die,	  Whispering I love you, before long I die,	  Whispering I love you, before long I die,	  Whispering I love you, before long I die,
  I have travel'd a long way merely to look on you to touch you,	  I have travel'd a long way merely to look on you to touch you,	  I have travel'd a long way merely to look on you to touch you,	  I have travel'd a long way merely to look on you to touch you,
  For I could not die till I once look'd on you,	  For I could not die till I once look'd on you,	  For I could not die till I once look'd on you,	  For I could not die till I once look'd on you,
  For I fear'd I might afterward lose you.	  For I fear'd I might afterward lose you.	  For I fear'd I might afterward lose you.	  For I fear'd I might afterward lose you.
			
  Now we have met, we have look'd, we are safe,	  Now we have met, we have look'd, we are safe,	  Now we have met, we have look'd, we are safe,	  Now we have met, we have look'd, we are safe,
  Return in peace to the ocean my love,	  Return in peace to the ocean my love,	  Return in peace to the ocean my love,	  Return in peace to the ocean my love,
  I too am part of that ocean my love, we are not so much separated,	  I too am part of that ocean my love, we are not so much separated,	  I too am part of that ocean my love, we are not so much separated,	  I too am part of that ocean my love, we are not so much separated,
  Behold the great rondure, the cohesion of all, how perfect!	  Behold the great rondure, the cohesion of all, how perfect!	  Behold the great rondure, the cohesion of all, how perfect!	  Behold the great rondure, the cohesion of all, how perfect!
  But as for me, for you, the irresistible sea is to separate us,	  But as for me, for you, the irresistible sea is to separate us,	  But as for me, for you, the irresistible sea is to separate us,	  But as for me, for you, the irresistible sea is to separate us,
  As for an hour carrying us diverse, yet cannot carry us diverse forever;	  As for an hour carrying us diverse, yet cannot carry us diverse forever;	  As for an hour carrying us diverse, yet cannot carry us diverse forever;	  As for an hour carrying us diverse, yet cannot carry us diverse forever;
  Be not impatient--a little space--know you I salute the air, the	  Be not impatient--a little space--know you I salute the air, the	  Be not impatient--a little space--know you I salute the air, the	  Be not impatient--a little space--know you I salute the air, the
      ocean and the land,	      ocean and the land,	      ocean and the land,	      ocean and the land,
  Every day at sundown for your dear sake my love.	  Every day at sundown for your dear sake my love.	  Every day at sundown for your dear sake my love.	  Every day at sundown for your dear sake my love.
			
			
			
			
Ages and Ages Returning at Intervals	Ages and Ages Returning at Intervals	Ages and Ages Returning at Intervals	Ages and Ages Returning at Intervals
			
  Ages and ages returning at intervals,	  Ages and ages returning at intervals,	  Ages and ages returning at intervals,	  Ages and ages returning at intervals,
  Undestroy'd, wandering immortal,	  Undestroy'd, wandering immortal,	  Undestroy'd, wandering immortal,	  Undestroy'd, wandering immortal,
  Lusty, phallic, with the potent original loins, perfectly sweet,	  Lusty, phallic, with the potent original loins, perfectly sweet,	  Lusty, phallic, with the potent original loins, perfectly sweet,	  Lusty, phallic, with the potent original loins, perfectly sweet,
  I, chanter of Adamic songs,	  I, chanter of Adamic songs,	  I, chanter of Adamic songs,	  I, chanter of Adamic songs,
  Through the new garden the West, the great cities calling,	  Through the new garden the West, the great cities calling,	  Through the new garden the West, the great cities calling,	  Through the new garden the West, the great cities calling,
  Deliriate, thus prelude what is generated, offering these, offering myself,	  Deliriate, thus prelude what is generated, offering these, offering myself,	  Deliriate, thus prelude what is generated, offering these, offering myself,	  Deliriate, thus prelude what is generated, offering these, offering myself,
  Bathing myself, bathing my songs in Sex,	  Bathing myself, bathing my songs in Sex,	  Bathing myself, bathing my songs in Sex,	  Bathing myself, bathing my songs in Sex,
  Offspring of my loins.	  Offspring of my loins.	  Offspring of my loins.	  Offspring of my loins.
			
			
			
			
We Two, How Long We Were Fool'd	We Two, How Long We Were Fool'd	We Two, How Long We Were Fool'd	We Two, How Long We Were Fool'd
			
  We two, how long we were fool'd,	  We two, how long we were fool'd,	  We two, how long we were fool'd,	  We two, how long we were fool'd,
  Now transmuted, we swiftly escape as Nature escapes,	  Now transmuted, we swiftly escape as Nature escapes,	  Now transmuted, we swiftly escape as Nature escapes,	  Now transmuted, we swiftly escape as Nature escapes,
  We are Nature, long have we been absent, but now we return,	  We are Nature, long have we been absent, but now we return,	  We are Nature, long have we been absent, but now we return,	  We are Nature, long have we been absent, but now we return,
  We become plants, trunks, foliage, roots, bark,	  We become plants, trunks, foliage, roots, bark,	  We become plants, trunks, foliage, roots, bark,	  We become plants, trunks, foliage, roots, bark,
  We are bedded in the ground, we are rocks,	  We are bedded in the ground, we are rocks,	  We are bedded in the ground, we are rocks,	  We are bedded in the ground, we are rocks,
  We are oaks, we grow in the openings side by side,	  We are oaks, we grow in the openings side by side,	  We are oaks, we grow in the openings side by side,	  We are oaks, we grow in the openings side by side,
  We browse, we are two among the wild herds spontaneous as any,	  We browse, we are two among the wild herds spontaneous as any,	  We browse, we are two among the wild herds spontaneous as any,	  We browse, we are two among the wild herds spontaneous as any,
  We are two fishes swimming in the sea together,	  We are two fishes swimming in the sea together,	  We are two fishes swimming in the sea together,	  We are two fishes swimming in the sea together,
  We are what locust blossoms are, we drop scent around lanes mornings	  We are what locust blossoms are, we drop scent around lanes mornings	  We are what locust blossoms are, we drop scent around lanes mornings	  We are what locust blossoms are, we drop scent around lanes mornings
      and evenings,	      and evenings,	      and evenings,	      and evenings,
  We are also the coarse smut of beasts, vegetables, minerals,	  We are also the coarse smut of beasts, vegetables, minerals,	  We are also the coarse smut of beasts, vegetables, minerals,	  We are also the coarse smut of beasts, vegetables, minerals,
  We are two predatory hawks, we soar above and look down,	  We are two predatory hawks, we soar above and look down,	  We are two predatory hawks, we soar above and look down,	  We are two predatory hawks, we soar above and look down,
  We are two resplendent suns, we it is who balance ourselves orbic	  We are two resplendent suns, we it is who balance ourselves orbic	  We are two resplendent suns, we it is who balance ourselves orbic	  We are two resplendent suns, we it is who balance ourselves orbic
      and stellar, we are as two comets,	      and stellar, we are as two comets,	      and stellar, we are as two comets,	      and stellar, we are as two comets,
  We prowl fang'd and four-footed in the woods, we spring on prey,	  We prowl fang'd and four-footed in the woods, we spring on prey,	  We prowl fang'd and four-footed in the woods, we spring on prey,	  We prowl fang'd and four-footed in the woods, we spring on prey,
  We are two clouds forenoons and afternoons driving overhead,	  We are two clouds forenoons and afternoons driving overhead,	  We are two clouds forenoons and afternoons driving overhead,	  We are two clouds forenoons and afternoons driving overhead,
  We are seas mingling, we are two of those cheerful waves rolling	  We are seas mingling, we are two of those cheerful waves rolling	  We are seas mingling, we are two of those cheerful waves rolling	  We are seas mingling, we are two of those cheerful waves rolling
      over each other and interwetting each other,	      over each other and interwetting each other,	      over each other and interwetting each other,	      over each other and interwetting each other,
  We are what the atmosphere is, transparent, receptive, pervious, impervious,	  We are what the atmosphere is, transparent, receptive, pervious, impervious,	  We are what the atmosphere is, transparent, receptive, pervious, impervious,	  We are what the atmosphere is, transparent, receptive, pervious, impervious,
  We are snow, rain, cold, darkness, we are each product and influence	  We are snow, rain, cold, darkness, we are each product and influence	  We are snow, rain, cold, darkness, we are each product and influence	  We are snow, rain, cold, darkness, we are each product and influence
      of the globe,	      of the globe,	      of the globe,	      of the globe,
  We have circled and circled till we have arrived home again, we two,	  We have circled and circled till we have arrived home again, we two,	  We have circled and circled till we have arrived home again, we two,	  We have circled and circled till we have arrived home again, we two,
  We have voided all but freedom and all but our own joy.	  We have voided all but freedom and all but our own joy.	  We have voided all but freedom and all but our own joy.	  We have voided all but freedom and all but our own joy.
			
			
			
			
O Hymen! O Hymenee!	O Hymen! O Hymenee!	O Hymen! O Hymenee!	O Hymen! O Hymenee!
			
  O hymen! O hymenee! why do you tantalize me thus?	  O hymen! O hymenee! why do you tantalize me thus?	  O hymen! O hymenee! why do you tantalize me thus?	  O hymen! O hymenee! why do you tantalize me thus?
  O why sting me for a swift moment only?	  O why sting me for a swift moment only?	  O why sting me for a swift moment only?	  O why sting me for a swift moment only?
  Why can you not continue? O why do you now cease?	  Why can you not continue? O why do you now cease?	  Why can you not continue? O why do you now cease?	  Why can you not continue? O why do you now cease?
  Is it because if you continued beyond the swift moment you would	  Is it because if you continued beyond the swift moment you would	  Is it because if you continued beyond the swift moment you would	  Is it because if you continued beyond the swift moment you would
      soon certainly kill me?	      soon certainly kill me?	      soon certainly kill me?	      soon certainly kill me?
			
			
			
			
I Am He That Aches with Love	I Am He That Aches with Love	I Am He That Aches with Love	I Am He That Aches with Love
			
  I am he that aches with amorous love;	  I am he that aches with amorous love;	  I am he that aches with amorous love;	  I am he that aches with amorous love;
  Does the earth gravitate? does not all matter, aching, attract all matter?	  Does the earth gravitate? does not all matter, aching, attract all matter?	  Does the earth gravitate? does not all matter, aching, attract all matter?	  Does the earth gravitate? does not all matter, aching, attract all matter?
  So the body of me to all I meet or know.	  So the body of me to all I meet or know.	  So the body of me to all I meet or know.	  So the body of me to all I meet or know.
			
			
			
			
Native Moments	Native Moments	Native Moments	Native Moments
			
  Native moments--when you come upon me--ah you are here now,	  Native moments--when you come upon me--ah you are here now,	  Native moments--when you come upon me--ah you are here now,	  Native moments--when you come upon me--ah you are here now,
  Give me now libidinous joys only,	  Give me now libidinous joys only,	  Give me now libidinous joys only,	  Give me now libidinous joys only,
  Give me the drench of my passions, give me life coarse and rank,	  Give me the drench of my passions, give me life coarse and rank,	  Give me the drench of my passions, give me life coarse and rank,	  Give me the drench of my passions, give me life coarse and rank,
  To-day I go consort with Nature's darlings, to-night too,	  To-day I go consort with Nature's darlings, to-night too,	  To-day I go consort with Nature's darlings, to-night too,	  To-day I go consort with Nature's darlings, to-night too,
  I am for those who believe in loose delights, I share the midnight	  I am for those who believe in loose delights, I share the midnight	  I am for those who believe in loose delights, I share the midnight	  I am for those who believe in loose delights, I share the midnight
      orgies of young men,	      orgies of young men,	      orgies of young men,	      orgies of young men,
  I dance with the dancers and drink with the drinkers,	  I dance with the dancers and drink with the drinkers,	  I dance with the dancers and drink with the drinkers,	  I dance with the dancers and drink with the drinkers,
  The echoes ring with our indecent calls, I pick out some low person	  The echoes ring with our indecent calls, I pick out some low person	  The echoes ring with our indecent calls, I pick out some low person	  The echoes ring with our indecent calls, I pick out some low person
      for my dearest friend,	      for my dearest friend,	      for my dearest friend,	      for my dearest friend,
  He shall be lawless, rude, illiterate, he shall be one condemn'd by	  He shall be lawless, rude, illiterate, he shall be one condemn'd by	  He shall be lawless, rude, illiterate, he shall be one condemn'd by	  He shall be lawless, rude, illiterate, he shall be one condemn'd by
      others for deeds done,	      others for deeds done,	      others for deeds done,	      others for deeds done,
  I will play a part no longer, why should I exile myself from my companions?	  I will play a part no longer, why should I exile myself from my companions?	  I will play a part no longer, why should I exile myself from my companions?	  I will play a part no longer, why should I exile myself from my companions?
  O you shunn'd persons, I at least do not shun you,	  O you shunn'd persons, I at least do not shun you,	  O you shunn'd persons, I at least do not shun you,	  O you shunn'd persons, I at least do not shun you,
  I come forthwith in your midst, I will be your poet,	  I come forthwith in your midst, I will be your poet,	  I come forthwith in your midst, I will be your poet,	  I come forthwith in your midst, I will be your poet,
  I will be more to you than to any of the rest.	  I will be more to you than to any of the rest.	  I will be more to you than to any of the rest.	  I will be more to you than to any of the rest.
			
			
			
			
Once I Pass'd Through a Populous City	Once I Pass'd Through a Populous City	Once I Pass'd Through a Populous City	Once I Pass'd Through a Populous City
			
  Once I pass'd through a populous city imprinting my brain for future	  Once I pass'd through a populous city imprinting my brain for future	  Once I pass'd through a populous city imprinting my brain for future	  Once I pass'd through a populous city imprinting my brain for future
      use with its shows, architecture, customs, traditions,	      use with its shows, architecture, customs, traditions,	      use with its shows, architecture, customs, traditions,	      use with its shows, architecture, customs, traditions,
  Yet now of all that city I remember only a woman I casually met	  Yet now of all that city I remember only a woman I casually met	  Yet now of all that city I remember only a woman I casually met	  Yet now of all that city I remember only a woman I casually met
      there who detain'd me for love of me,	      there who detain'd me for love of me,	      there who detain'd me for love of me,	      there who detain'd me for love of me,
  Day by day and night by night we were together--all else has long	  Day by day and night by night we were together--all else has long	  Day by day and night by night we were together--all else has long	  Day by day and night by night we were together--all else has long
      been forgotten by me,	      been forgotten by me,	      been forgotten by me,	      been forgotten by me,
  I remember I say only that woman who passionately clung to me,	  I remember I say only that woman who passionately clung to me,	  I remember I say only that woman who passionately clung to me,	  I remember I say only that woman who passionately clung to me,
  Again we wander, we love, we separate again,	  Again we wander, we love, we separate again,	  Again we wander, we love, we separate again,	  Again we wander, we love, we separate again,
  Again she holds me by the hand, I must not go,	  Again she holds me by the hand, I must not go,	  Again she holds me by the hand, I must not go,	  Again she holds me by the hand, I must not go,
  I see her close beside me with silent lips sad and tremulous.	  I see her close beside me with silent lips sad and tremulous.	  I see her close beside me with silent lips sad and tremulous.	  I see her close beside me with silent lips sad and tremulous.
			
			
			
			
I Heard You Solemn-Sweet Pipes of the Organ	I Heard You Solemn-Sweet Pipes of the Organ	I Heard You Solemn-Sweet Pipes of the Organ	I Heard You Solemn-Sweet Pipes of the Organ
			
  I heard you solemn-sweet pipes of the organ as last Sunday morn I	  I heard you solemn-sweet pipes of the organ as last Sunday morn I	  I heard you solemn-sweet pipes of the organ as last Sunday morn I	  I heard you solemn-sweet pipes of the organ as last Sunday morn I
      pass'd the church,	      pass'd the church,	      pass'd the church,	      pass'd the church,
  Winds of autumn, as I walk'd the woods at dusk I heard your long-	  Winds of autumn, as I walk'd the woods at dusk I heard your long-	  Winds of autumn, as I walk'd the woods at dusk I heard your long-	  Winds of autumn, as I walk'd the woods at dusk I heard your long-
      stretch'd sighs up above so mournful,	      stretch'd sighs up above so mournful,	      stretch'd sighs up above so mournful,	      stretch'd sighs up above so mournful,
  I heard the perfect Italian tenor singing at the opera, I heard the	  I heard the perfect Italian tenor singing at the opera, I heard the	  I heard the perfect Italian tenor singing at the opera, I heard the	  I heard the perfect Italian tenor singing at the opera, I heard the
      soprano in the midst of the quartet singing;	      soprano in the midst of the quartet singing;	      soprano in the midst of the quartet singing;	      soprano in the midst of the quartet singing;
  Heart of my love! you too I heard murmuring low through one of the	  Heart of my love! you too I heard murmuring low through one of the	  Heart of my love! you too I heard murmuring low through one of the	  Heart of my love! you too I heard murmuring low through one of the
      wrists around my head,	      wrists around my head,	      wrists around my head,	      wrists around my head,
  Heard the pulse of you when all was still ringing little bells last	  Heard the pulse of you when all was still ringing little bells last	  Heard the pulse of you when all was still ringing little bells last	  Heard the pulse of you when all was still ringing little bells last
      night under my ear.	      night under my ear.	      night under my ear.	      night under my ear.
			
			
			
			
Facing West from California's Shores	Facing West from California's Shores	Facing West from California's Shores	Facing West from California's Shores
			
  Facing west from California's shores,	  Facing west from California's shores,	  Facing west from California's shores,	  Facing west from California's shores,
  Inquiring, tireless, seeking what is yet unfound,	  Inquiring, tireless, seeking what is yet unfound,	  Inquiring, tireless, seeking what is yet unfound,	  Inquiring, tireless, seeking what is yet unfound,
  I, a child, very old, over waves, towards the house of maternity,	  I, a child, very old, over waves, towards the house of maternity,	  I, a child, very old, over waves, towards the house of maternity,	  I, a child, very old, over waves, towards the house of maternity,
      the land of migrations, look afar,	      the land of migrations, look afar,	      the land of migrations, look afar,	      the land of migrations, look afar,
  Look off the shores of my Western sea, the circle almost circled;	  Look off the shores of my Western sea, the circle almost circled;	  Look off the shores of my Western sea, the circle almost circled;	  Look off the shores of my Western sea, the circle almost circled;
  For starting westward from Hindustan, from the vales of Kashmere,	  For starting westward from Hindustan, from the vales of Kashmere,	  For starting westward from Hindustan, from the vales of Kashmere,	  For starting westward from Hindustan, from the vales of Kashmere,
  From Asia, from the north, from the God, the sage, and the hero,	  From Asia, from the north, from the God, the sage, and the hero,	  From Asia, from the north, from the God, the sage, and the hero,	  From Asia, from the north, from the God, the sage, and the hero,
  From the south, from the flowery peninsulas and the spice islands,	  From the south, from the flowery peninsulas and the spice islands,	  From the south, from the flowery peninsulas and the spice islands,	  From the south, from the flowery peninsulas and the spice islands,
  Long having wander'd since, round the earth having wander'd,	  Long having wander'd since, round the earth having wander'd,	  Long having wander'd since, round the earth having wander'd,	  Long having wander'd since, round the earth having wander'd,
  Now I face home again, very pleas'd and joyous,	  Now I face home again, very pleas'd and joyous,	  Now I face home again, very pleas'd and joyous,	  Now I face home again, very pleas'd and joyous,
  (But where is what I started for so long ago?	  (But where is what I started for so long ago?	  (But where is what I started for so long ago?	  (But where is what I started for so long ago?
  And why is it yet unfound?)	  And why is it yet unfound?)	  And why is it yet unfound?)	  And why is it yet unfound?)
			
			
			
			
As Adam Early in the Morning	As Adam Early in the Morning	As Adam Early in the Morning	As Adam Early in the Morning
			
  As Adam early in the morning,	  As Adam early in the morning,	  As Adam early in the morning,	  As Adam early in the morning,
  Walking forth from the bower refresh'd with sleep,	  Walking forth from the bower refresh'd with sleep,	  Walking forth from the bower refresh'd with sleep,	  Walking forth from the bower refresh'd with sleep,
  Behold me where I pass, hear my voice, approach,	  Behold me where I pass, hear my voice, approach,	  Behold me where I pass, hear my voice, approach,	  Behold me where I pass, hear my voice, approach,
  Touch me, touch the palm of your hand to my body as I pass,	  Touch me, touch the palm of your hand to my body as I pass,	  Touch me, touch the palm of your hand to my body as I pass,	  Touch me, touch the palm of your hand to my body as I pass,
  Be not afraid of my body.	  Be not afraid of my body.	  Be not afraid of my body.	  Be not afraid of my body.
			
			
			
			
BOOK V.  CALAMUS	BOOK V.  CALAMUS	BOOK V.  CALAMUS	BOOK V.  CALAMUS
			
			
In Paths Untrodden	In Paths Untrodden	In Paths Untrodden	In Paths Untrodden
			
  In paths untrodden,	  In paths untrodden,	  In paths untrodden,	  In paths untrodden,
  In the growth by margins of pond-waters,	  In the growth by margins of pond-waters,	  In the growth by margins of pond-waters,	  In the growth by margins of pond-waters,
  Escaped from the life that exhibits itself,	  Escaped from the life that exhibits itself,	  Escaped from the life that exhibits itself,	  Escaped from the life that exhibits itself,
  From all the standards hitherto publish'd, from the pleasures,	  From all the standards hitherto publish'd, from the pleasures,	  From all the standards hitherto publish'd, from the pleasures,	  From all the standards hitherto publish'd, from the pleasures,
      profits, conformities,	      profits, conformities,	      profits, conformities,	      profits, conformities,
  Which too long I was offering to feed my soul,	  Which too long I was offering to feed my soul,	  Which too long I was offering to feed my soul,	  Which too long I was offering to feed my soul,
  Clear to me now standards not yet publish'd, clear to me that my soul,	  Clear to me now standards not yet publish'd, clear to me that my soul,	  Clear to me now standards not yet publish'd, clear to me that my soul,	  Clear to me now standards not yet publish'd, clear to me that my soul,
  That the soul of the man I speak for rejoices in comrades,	  That the soul of the man I speak for rejoices in comrades,	  That the soul of the man I speak for rejoices in comrades,	  That the soul of the man I speak for rejoices in comrades,
  Here by myself away from the clank of the world,	  Here by myself away from the clank of the world,	  Here by myself away from the clank of the world,	  Here by myself away from the clank of the world,
  Tallying and talk'd to here by tongues aromatic,	  Tallying and talk'd to here by tongues aromatic,	  Tallying and talk'd to here by tongues aromatic,	  Tallying and talk'd to here by tongues aromatic,
  No longer abash'd, (for in this secluded spot I can respond as I	  No longer abash'd, (for in this secluded spot I can respond as I	  No longer abash'd, (for in this secluded spot I can respond as I	  No longer abash'd, (for in this secluded spot I can respond as I
      would not dare elsewhere,)	      would not dare elsewhere,)	      would not dare elsewhere,)	      would not dare elsewhere,)
  Strong upon me the life that does not exhibit itself, yet contains	  Strong upon me the life that does not exhibit itself, yet contains	  Strong upon me the life that does not exhibit itself, yet contains	  Strong upon me the life that does not exhibit itself, yet contains
      all the rest,	      all the rest,	      all the rest,	      all the rest,
  Resolv'd to sing no songs to-day but those of manly attachment,	  Resolv'd to sing no songs to-day but those of manly attachment,	  Resolv'd to sing no songs to-day but those of manly attachment,	  Resolv'd to sing no songs to-day but those of manly attachment,
  Projecting them along that substantial life,	  Projecting them along that substantial life,	  Projecting them along that substantial life,	  Projecting them along that substantial life,
  Bequeathing hence types of athletic love,	  Bequeathing hence types of athletic love,	  Bequeathing hence types of athletic love,	  Bequeathing hence types of athletic love,
  Afternoon this delicious Ninth-month in my forty-first year,	  Afternoon this delicious Ninth-month in my forty-first year,	  Afternoon this delicious Ninth-month in my forty-first year,	  Afternoon this delicious Ninth-month in my forty-first year,
  I proceed for all who are or have been young men,	  I proceed for all who are or have been young men,	  I proceed for all who are or have been young men,	  I proceed for all who are or have been young men,
  To tell the secret my nights and days,	  To tell the secret my nights and days,	  To tell the secret my nights and days,	  To tell the secret my nights and days,
  To celebrate the need of comrades.	  To celebrate the need of comrades.	  To celebrate the need of comrades.	  To celebrate the need of comrades.
			
			
			
			
Scented Herbage of My Breast	Scented Herbage of My Breast	Scented Herbage of My Breast	Scented Herbage of My Breast
			
  Scented herbage of my breast,	  Scented herbage of my breast,	  Scented herbage of my breast,	  Scented herbage of my breast,
  Leaves from you I glean, I write, to be perused best afterwards,	  Leaves from you I glean, I write, to be perused best afterwards,	  Leaves from you I glean, I write, to be perused best afterwards,	  Leaves from you I glean, I write, to be perused best afterwards,
  Tomb-leaves, body-leaves growing up above me above death,	  Tomb-leaves, body-leaves growing up above me above death,	  Tomb-leaves, body-leaves growing up above me above death,	  Tomb-leaves, body-leaves growing up above me above death,
  Perennial roots, tall leaves, O the winter shall not freeze you	  Perennial roots, tall leaves, O the winter shall not freeze you	  Perennial roots, tall leaves, O the winter shall not freeze you	  Perennial roots, tall leaves, O the winter shall not freeze you
      delicate leaves,	      delicate leaves,	      delicate leaves,	      delicate leaves,
  Every year shall you bloom again, out from where you retired you	  Every year shall you bloom again, out from where you retired you	  Every year shall you bloom again, out from where you retired you	  Every year shall you bloom again, out from where you retired you
      shall emerge again;	      shall emerge again;	      shall emerge again;	      shall emerge again;
  O I do not know whether many passing by will discover you or inhale	  O I do not know whether many passing by will discover you or inhale	  O I do not know whether many passing by will discover you or inhale	  O I do not know whether many passing by will discover you or inhale
      your faint odor, but I believe a few will;	      your faint odor, but I believe a few will;	      your faint odor, but I believe a few will;	      your faint odor, but I believe a few will;
  O slender leaves! O blossoms of my blood! I permit you to tell in	  O slender leaves! O blossoms of my blood! I permit you to tell in	  O slender leaves! O blossoms of my blood! I permit you to tell in	  O slender leaves! O blossoms of my blood! I permit you to tell in
      your own way of the heart that is under you,	      your own way of the heart that is under you,	      your own way of the heart that is under you,	      your own way of the heart that is under you,
  O I do not know what you mean there underneath yourselves, you are	  O I do not know what you mean there underneath yourselves, you are	  O I do not know what you mean there underneath yourselves, you are	  O I do not know what you mean there underneath yourselves, you are
      not happiness,	      not happiness,	      not happiness,	      not happiness,
  You are often more bitter than I can bear, you burn and sting me,	  You are often more bitter than I can bear, you burn and sting me,	  You are often more bitter than I can bear, you burn and sting me,	  You are often more bitter than I can bear, you burn and sting me,
  Yet you are beautiful to me you faint tinged roots, you make me	  Yet you are beautiful to me you faint tinged roots, you make me	  Yet you are beautiful to me you faint tinged roots, you make me	  Yet you are beautiful to me you faint tinged roots, you make me
      think of death,	      think of death,	      think of death,	      think of death,
  Death is beautiful from you, (what indeed is finally beautiful	  Death is beautiful from you, (what indeed is finally beautiful	  Death is beautiful from you, (what indeed is finally beautiful	  Death is beautiful from you, (what indeed is finally beautiful
      except death and love?)	      except death and love?)	      except death and love?)	      except death and love?)
  O I think it is not for life I am chanting here my chant of lovers,	  O I think it is not for life I am chanting here my chant of lovers,	  O I think it is not for life I am chanting here my chant of lovers,	  O I think it is not for life I am chanting here my chant of lovers,
      I think it must be for death,	      I think it must be for death,	      I think it must be for death,	      I think it must be for death,
  For how calm, how solemn it grows to ascend to the atmosphere of lovers,	  For how calm, how solemn it grows to ascend to the atmosphere of lovers,	  For how calm, how solemn it grows to ascend to the atmosphere of lovers,	  For how calm, how solemn it grows to ascend to the atmosphere of lovers,
  Death or life I am then indifferent, my soul declines to prefer,	  Death or life I am then indifferent, my soul declines to prefer,	  Death or life I am then indifferent, my soul declines to prefer,	  Death or life I am then indifferent, my soul declines to prefer,
  (I am not sure but the high soul of lovers welcomes death most,)	  (I am not sure but the high soul of lovers welcomes death most,)	  (I am not sure but the high soul of lovers welcomes death most,)	  (I am not sure but the high soul of lovers welcomes death most,)
  Indeed O death, I think now these leaves mean precisely the same as	  Indeed O death, I think now these leaves mean precisely the same as	  Indeed O death, I think now these leaves mean precisely the same as	  Indeed O death, I think now these leaves mean precisely the same as
      you mean,	      you mean,	      you mean,	      you mean,
  Grow up taller sweet leaves that I may see! grow up out of my breast!	  Grow up taller sweet leaves that I may see! grow up out of my breast!	  Grow up taller sweet leaves that I may see! grow up out of my breast!	  Grow up taller sweet leaves that I may see! grow up out of my breast!
  Spring away from the conceal'd heart there!	  Spring away from the conceal'd heart there!	  Spring away from the conceal'd heart there!	  Spring away from the conceal'd heart there!
  Do not fold yourself so in your pink-tinged roots timid leaves!	  Do not fold yourself so in your pink-tinged roots timid leaves!	  Do not fold yourself so in your pink-tinged roots timid leaves!	  Do not fold yourself so in your pink-tinged roots timid leaves!
  Do not remain down there so ashamed, herbage of my breast!	  Do not remain down there so ashamed, herbage of my breast!	  Do not remain down there so ashamed, herbage of my breast!	  Do not remain down there so ashamed, herbage of my breast!
  Come I am determin'd to unbare this broad breast of mine, I have	  Come I am determin'd to unbare this broad breast of mine, I have	  Come I am determin'd to unbare this broad breast of mine, I have	  Come I am determin'd to unbare this broad breast of mine, I have
      long enough stifled and choked;	      long enough stifled and choked;	      long enough stifled and choked;	      long enough stifled and choked;
  Emblematic and capricious blades I leave you, now you serve me not,	  Emblematic and capricious blades I leave you, now you serve me not,	  Emblematic and capricious blades I leave you, now you serve me not,	  Emblematic and capricious blades I leave you, now you serve me not,
  I will say what I have to say by itself,	  I will say what I have to say by itself,	  I will say what I have to say by itself,	  I will say what I have to say by itself,
  I will sound myself and comrades only, I will never again utter a	  I will sound myself and comrades only, I will never again utter a	  I will sound myself and comrades only, I will never again utter a	  I will sound myself and comrades only, I will never again utter a
      call only their call,	      call only their call,	      call only their call,	      call only their call,
  I will raise with it immortal reverberations through the States,	  I will raise with it immortal reverberations through the States,	  I will raise with it immortal reverberations through the States,	  I will raise with it immortal reverberations through the States,
  I will give an example to lovers to take permanent shape and will	  I will give an example to lovers to take permanent shape and will	  I will give an example to lovers to take permanent shape and will	  I will give an example to lovers to take permanent shape and will
      through the States,	      through the States,	      through the States,	      through the States,
  Through me shall the words be said to make death exhilarating,	  Through me shall the words be said to make death exhilarating,	  Through me shall the words be said to make death exhilarating,	  Through me shall the words be said to make death exhilarating,
  Give me your tone therefore O death, that I may accord with it,	  Give me your tone therefore O death, that I may accord with it,	  Give me your tone therefore O death, that I may accord with it,	  Give me your tone therefore O death, that I may accord with it,
  Give me yourself, for I see that you belong to me now above all, and	  Give me yourself, for I see that you belong to me now above all, and	  Give me yourself, for I see that you belong to me now above all, and	  Give me yourself, for I see that you belong to me now above all, and
      are folded inseparably together, you love and death are,	      are folded inseparably together, you love and death are,	      are folded inseparably together, you love and death are,	      are folded inseparably together, you love and death are,
  Nor will I allow you to balk me any more with what I was calling life,	  Nor will I allow you to balk me any more with what I was calling life,	  Nor will I allow you to balk me any more with what I was calling life,	  Nor will I allow you to balk me any more with what I was calling life,
  For now it is convey'd to me that you are the purports essential,	  For now it is convey'd to me that you are the purports essential,	  For now it is convey'd to me that you are the purports essential,	  For now it is convey'd to me that you are the purports essential,
  That you hide in these shifting forms of life, for reasons, and that	  That you hide in these shifting forms of life, for reasons, and that	  That you hide in these shifting forms of life, for reasons, and that	  That you hide in these shifting forms of life, for reasons, and that
      they are mainly for you,	      they are mainly for you,	      they are mainly for you,	      they are mainly for you,
  That you beyond them come forth to remain, the real reality,	  That you beyond them come forth to remain, the real reality,	  That you beyond them come forth to remain, the real reality,	  That you beyond them come forth to remain, the real reality,
  That behind the mask of materials you patiently wait, no matter how long,	  That behind the mask of materials you patiently wait, no matter how long,	  That behind the mask of materials you patiently wait, no matter how long,	  That behind the mask of materials you patiently wait, no matter how long,
  That you will one day perhaps take control of all,	  That you will one day perhaps take control of all,	  That you will one day perhaps take control of all,	  That you will one day perhaps take control of all,
  That you will perhaps dissipate this entire show of appearance,	  That you will perhaps dissipate this entire show of appearance,	  That you will perhaps dissipate this entire show of appearance,	  That you will perhaps dissipate this entire show of appearance,
  That may-be you are what it is all for, but it does not last so very long,	  That may-be you are what it is all for, but it does not last so very long,	  That may-be you are what it is all for, but it does not last so very long,	  That may-be you are what it is all for, but it does not last so very long,
  But you will last very long.	  But you will last very long.	  But you will last very long.	  But you will last very long.
			
			
			
			
Whoever You Are Holding Me Now in Hand	Whoever You Are Holding Me Now in Hand	Whoever You Are Holding Me Now in Hand	Whoever You Are Holding Me Now in Hand
			
  Whoever you are holding me now in hand,	  Whoever you are holding me now in hand,	  Whoever you are holding me now in hand,	  Whoever you are holding me now in hand,
  Without one thing all will be useless,	  Without one thing all will be useless,	  Without one thing all will be useless,	  Without one thing all will be useless,
  I give you fair warning before you attempt me further,	  I give you fair warning before you attempt me further,	  I give you fair warning before you attempt me further,	  I give you fair warning before you attempt me further,
  I am not what you supposed, but far different.	  I am not what you supposed, but far different.	  I am not what you supposed, but far different.	  I am not what you supposed, but far different.
			
  Who is he that would become my follower?	  Who is he that would become my follower?	  Who is he that would become my follower?	  Who is he that would become my follower?
  Who would sign himself a candidate for my affections?	  Who would sign himself a candidate for my affections?	  Who would sign himself a candidate for my affections?	  Who would sign himself a candidate for my affections?
			
  The way is suspicious, the result uncertain, perhaps destructive,	  The way is suspicious, the result uncertain, perhaps destructive,	  The way is suspicious, the result uncertain, perhaps destructive,	  The way is suspicious, the result uncertain, perhaps destructive,
  You would have to give up all else, I alone would expect to be your	  You would have to give up all else, I alone would expect to be your	  You would have to give up all else, I alone would expect to be your	  You would have to give up all else, I alone would expect to be your
      sole and exclusive standard,	      sole and exclusive standard,	      sole and exclusive standard,	      sole and exclusive standard,
  Your novitiate would even then be long and exhausting,	  Your novitiate would even then be long and exhausting,	  Your novitiate would even then be long and exhausting,	  Your novitiate would even then be long and exhausting,
  The whole past theory of your life and all conformity to the lives	  The whole past theory of your life and all conformity to the lives	  The whole past theory of your life and all conformity to the lives	  The whole past theory of your life and all conformity to the lives
      around you would have to be abandon'd,	      around you would have to be abandon'd,	      around you would have to be abandon'd,	      around you would have to be abandon'd,
  Therefore release me now before troubling yourself any further, let	  Therefore release me now before troubling yourself any further, let	  Therefore release me now before troubling yourself any further, let	  Therefore release me now before troubling yourself any further, let
      go your hand from my shoulders,	      go your hand from my shoulders,	      go your hand from my shoulders,	      go your hand from my shoulders,
  Put me down and depart on your way.	  Put me down and depart on your way.	  Put me down and depart on your way.	  Put me down and depart on your way.
			
  Or else by stealth in some wood for trial,	  Or else by stealth in some wood for trial,	  Or else by stealth in some wood for trial,	  Or else by stealth in some wood for trial,
  Or back of a rock in the open air,	  Or back of a rock in the open air,	  Or back of a rock in the open air,	  Or back of a rock in the open air,
  (For in any roof'd room of a house I emerge not, nor in company,	  (For in any roof'd room of a house I emerge not, nor in company,	  (For in any roof'd room of a house I emerge not, nor in company,	  (For in any roof'd room of a house I emerge not, nor in company,
  And in libraries I lie as one dumb, a gawk, or unborn, or dead,)	  And in libraries I lie as one dumb, a gawk, or unborn, or dead,)	  And in libraries I lie as one dumb, a gawk, or unborn, or dead,)	  And in libraries I lie as one dumb, a gawk, or unborn, or dead,)
  But just possibly with you on a high hill, first watching lest any	  But just possibly with you on a high hill, first watching lest any	  But just possibly with you on a high hill, first watching lest any	  But just possibly with you on a high hill, first watching lest any
      person for miles around approach unawares,	      person for miles around approach unawares,	      person for miles around approach unawares,	      person for miles around approach unawares,
  Or possibly with you sailing at sea, or on the beach of the sea or	  Or possibly with you sailing at sea, or on the beach of the sea or	  Or possibly with you sailing at sea, or on the beach of the sea or	  Or possibly with you sailing at sea, or on the beach of the sea or
      some quiet island,	      some quiet island,	      some quiet island,	      some quiet island,
  Here to put your lips upon mine I permit you,	  Here to put your lips upon mine I permit you,	  Here to put your lips upon mine I permit you,	  Here to put your lips upon mine I permit you,
  With the comrade's long-dwelling kiss or the new husband's kiss,	  With the comrade's long-dwelling kiss or the new husband's kiss,	  With the comrade's long-dwelling kiss or the new husband's kiss,	  With the comrade's long-dwelling kiss or the new husband's kiss,
  For I am the new husband and I am the comrade.	  For I am the new husband and I am the comrade.	  For I am the new husband and I am the comrade.	  For I am the new husband and I am the comrade.
			
  Or if you will, thrusting me beneath your clothing,	  Or if you will, thrusting me beneath your clothing,	  Or if you will, thrusting me beneath your clothing,	  Or if you will, thrusting me beneath your clothing,
  Where I may feel the throbs of your heart or rest upon your hip,	  Where I may feel the throbs of your heart or rest upon your hip,	  Where I may feel the throbs of your heart or rest upon your hip,	  Where I may feel the throbs of your heart or rest upon your hip,
  Carry me when you go forth over land or sea;	  Carry me when you go forth over land or sea;	  Carry me when you go forth over land or sea;	  Carry me when you go forth over land or sea;
  For thus merely touching you is enough, is best,	  For thus merely touching you is enough, is best,	  For thus merely touching you is enough, is best,	  For thus merely touching you is enough, is best,
  And thus touching you would I silently sleep and be carried eternally.	  And thus touching you would I silently sleep and be carried eternally.	  And thus touching you would I silently sleep and be carried eternally.	  And thus touching you would I silently sleep and be carried eternally.
			
  But these leaves conning you con at peril,	  But these leaves conning you con at peril,	  But these leaves conning you con at peril,	  But these leaves conning you con at peril,
  For these leaves and me you will not understand,	  For these leaves and me you will not understand,	  For these leaves and me you will not understand,	  For these leaves and me you will not understand,
  They will elude you at first and still more afterward, I will	  They will elude you at first and still more afterward, I will	  They will elude you at first and still more afterward, I will	  They will elude you at first and still more afterward, I will
      certainly elude you.	      certainly elude you.	      certainly elude you.	      certainly elude you.
  Even while you should think you had unquestionably caught me, behold!	  Even while you should think you had unquestionably caught me, behold!	  Even while you should think you had unquestionably caught me, behold!	  Even while you should think you had unquestionably caught me, behold!
  Already you see I have escaped from you.	  Already you see I have escaped from you.	  Already you see I have escaped from you.	  Already you see I have escaped from you.
			
  For it is not for what I have put into it that I have written this book,	  For it is not for what I have put into it that I have written this book,	  For it is not for what I have put into it that I have written this book,	  For it is not for what I have put into it that I have written this book,
  Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it,	  Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it,	  Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it,	  Nor is it by reading it you will acquire it,
  Nor do those know me best who admire me and vauntingly praise me,	  Nor do those know me best who admire me and vauntingly praise me,	  Nor do those know me best who admire me and vauntingly praise me,	  Nor do those know me best who admire me and vauntingly praise me,
  Nor will the candidates for my love (unless at most a very few)	  Nor will the candidates for my love (unless at most a very few)	  Nor will the candidates for my love (unless at most a very few)	  Nor will the candidates for my love (unless at most a very few)
      prove victorious,	      prove victorious,	      prove victorious,	      prove victorious,
  Nor will my poems do good only, they will do just as much evil,	  Nor will my poems do good only, they will do just as much evil,	  Nor will my poems do good only, they will do just as much evil,	  Nor will my poems do good only, they will do just as much evil,
      perhaps more,	      perhaps more,	      perhaps more,	      perhaps more,
  For all is useless without that which you may guess at many times	  For all is useless without that which you may guess at many times	  For all is useless without that which you may guess at many times	  For all is useless without that which you may guess at many times
      and not hit, that which I hinted at;	      and not hit, that which I hinted at;	      and not hit, that which I hinted at;	      and not hit, that which I hinted at;
  Therefore release me and depart on your way.	  Therefore release me and depart on your way.	  Therefore release me and depart on your way.	  Therefore release me and depart on your way.
			
			
			
			
For You, O Democracy	For You, O Democracy	For You, O Democracy	For You, O Democracy
			
  Come, I will make the continent indissoluble,	  Come, I will make the continent indissoluble,	  Come, I will make the continent indissoluble,	  Come, I will make the continent indissoluble,
  I will make the most splendid race the sun ever shone upon,	  I will make the most splendid race the sun ever shone upon,	  I will make the most splendid race the sun ever shone upon,	  I will make the most splendid race the sun ever shone upon,
  I will make divine magnetic lands,	  I will make divine magnetic lands,	  I will make divine magnetic lands,	  I will make divine magnetic lands,
       With the love of comrades,	       With the love of comrades,	       With the love of comrades,	       With the love of comrades,
         With the life-long love of comrades.	         With the life-long love of comrades.	         With the life-long love of comrades.	         With the life-long love of comrades.
			
  I will plant companionship thick as trees along all the rivers of America,	  I will plant companionship thick as trees along all the rivers of America,	  I will plant companionship thick as trees along all the rivers of America,	  I will plant companionship thick as trees along all the rivers of America,
      and along the shores of the great lakes, and all over the prairies,	      and along the shores of the great lakes, and all over the prairies,	      and along the shores of the great lakes, and all over the prairies,	      and along the shores of the great lakes, and all over the prairies,
  I will make inseparable cities with their arms about each other's necks,	  I will make inseparable cities with their arms about each other's necks,	  I will make inseparable cities with their arms about each other's necks,	  I will make inseparable cities with their arms about each other's necks,
       By the love of comrades,	       By the love of comrades,	       By the love of comrades,	       By the love of comrades,
         By the manly love of comrades.	         By the manly love of comrades.	         By the manly love of comrades.	         By the manly love of comrades.
			
  For you these from me, O Democracy, to serve you ma femme!	  For you these from me, O Democracy, to serve you ma femme!	  For you these from me, O Democracy, to serve you ma femme!	  For you these from me, O Democracy, to serve you ma femme!
  For you, for you I am trilling these songs.	  For you, for you I am trilling these songs.	  For you, for you I am trilling these songs.	  For you, for you I am trilling these songs.
			
			
			
			
These I Singing in Spring	These I Singing in Spring	These I Singing in Spring	These I Singing in Spring
			
  These I singing in spring collect for lovers,	  These I singing in spring collect for lovers,	  These I singing in spring collect for lovers,	  These I singing in spring collect for lovers,
  (For who but I should understand lovers and all their sorrow and joy?	  (For who but I should understand lovers and all their sorrow and joy?	  (For who but I should understand lovers and all their sorrow and joy?	  (For who but I should understand lovers and all their sorrow and joy?
  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?)	  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?)	  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?)	  And who but I should be the poet of comrades?)
  Collecting I traverse the garden the world, but soon I pass the gates,	  Collecting I traverse the garden the world, but soon I pass the gates,	  Collecting I traverse the garden the world, but soon I pass the gates,	  Collecting I traverse the garden the world, but soon I pass the gates,
  Now along the pond-side, now wading in a little, fearing not the wet,	  Now along the pond-side, now wading in a little, fearing not the wet,	  Now along the pond-side, now wading in a little, fearing not the wet,	  Now along the pond-side, now wading in a little, fearing not the wet,
  Now by the post-and-rail fences where the old stones thrown there,	  Now by the post-and-rail fences where the old stones thrown there,	  Now by the post-and-rail fences where the old stones thrown there,	  Now by the post-and-rail fences where the old stones thrown there,
      pick'd from the fields, have accumulated,	      pick'd from the fields, have accumulated,	      pick'd from the fields, have accumulated,	      pick'd from the fields, have accumulated,
  (Wild-flowers and vines and weeds come up through the stones and	  (Wild-flowers and vines and weeds come up through the stones and	  (Wild-flowers and vines and weeds come up through the stones and	  (Wild-flowers and vines and weeds come up through the stones and
      partly cover them, beyond these I pass,)	      partly cover them, beyond these I pass,)	      partly cover them, beyond these I pass,)	      partly cover them, beyond these I pass,)
  Far, far in the forest, or sauntering later in summer, before I	  Far, far in the forest, or sauntering later in summer, before I	  Far, far in the forest, or sauntering later in summer, before I	  Far, far in the forest, or sauntering later in summer, before I
      think where I go,	      think where I go,	      think where I go,	      think where I go,
  Solitary, smelling the earthy smell, stopping now and then in the silence,	  Solitary, smelling the earthy smell, stopping now and then in the silence,	  Solitary, smelling the earthy smell, stopping now and then in the silence,	  Solitary, smelling the earthy smell, stopping now and then in the silence,
  Alone I had thought, yet soon a troop gathers around me,	  Alone I had thought, yet soon a troop gathers around me,	  Alone I had thought, yet soon a troop gathers around me,	  Alone I had thought, yet soon a troop gathers around me,
  Some walk by my side and some behind, and some embrace my arms or neck,	  Some walk by my side and some behind, and some embrace my arms or neck,	  Some walk by my side and some behind, and some embrace my arms or neck,	  Some walk by my side and some behind, and some embrace my arms or neck,
  They the spirits of dear friends dead or alive, thicker they come, a	  They the spirits of dear friends dead or alive, thicker they come, a	  They the spirits of dear friends dead or alive, thicker they come, a	  They the spirits of dear friends dead or alive, thicker they come, a
      great crowd, and I in the middle,	      great crowd, and I in the middle,	      great crowd, and I in the middle,	      great crowd, and I in the middle,
  Collecting, dispensing, singing, there I wander with them,	  Collecting, dispensing, singing, there I wander with them,	  Collecting, dispensing, singing, there I wander with them,	  Collecting, dispensing, singing, there I wander with them,
  Plucking something for tokens, tossing toward whoever is near me,	  Plucking something for tokens, tossing toward whoever is near me,	  Plucking something for tokens, tossing toward whoever is near me,	  Plucking something for tokens, tossing toward whoever is near me,
  Here, lilac, with a branch of pine,	  Here, lilac, with a branch of pine,	  Here, lilac, with a branch of pine,	  Here, lilac, with a branch of pine,
  Here, out of my pocket, some moss which I pull'd off a live-oak in	  Here, out of my pocket, some moss which I pull'd off a live-oak in	  Here, out of my pocket, some moss which I pull'd off a live-oak in	  Here, out of my pocket, some moss which I pull'd off a live-oak in
      Florida as it hung trailing down,	      Florida as it hung trailing down,	      Florida as it hung trailing down,	      Florida as it hung trailing down,
  Here, some pinks and laurel leaves, and a handful of sage,	  Here, some pinks and laurel leaves, and a handful of sage,	  Here, some pinks and laurel leaves, and a handful of sage,	  Here, some pinks and laurel leaves, and a handful of sage,
  And here what I now draw from the water, wading in the pondside,	  And here what I now draw from the water, wading in the pondside,	  And here what I now draw from the water, wading in the pondside,	  And here what I now draw from the water, wading in the pondside,
  (O here I last saw him that tenderly loves me, and returns again	  (O here I last saw him that tenderly loves me, and returns again	  (O here I last saw him that tenderly loves me, and returns again	  (O here I last saw him that tenderly loves me, and returns again
      never to separate from me,	      never to separate from me,	      never to separate from me,	      never to separate from me,
  And this, O this shall henceforth be the token of comrades, this	  And this, O this shall henceforth be the token of comrades, this	  And this, O this shall henceforth be the token of comrades, this	  And this, O this shall henceforth be the token of comrades, this
      calamus-root shall,	      calamus-root shall,	      calamus-root shall,	      calamus-root shall,
  Interchange it youths with each other! let none render it back!)	  Interchange it youths with each other! let none render it back!)	  Interchange it youths with each other! let none render it back!)	  Interchange it youths with each other! let none render it back!)
  And twigs of maple and a bunch of wild orange and chestnut,	  And twigs of maple and a bunch of wild orange and chestnut,	  And twigs of maple and a bunch of wild orange and chestnut,	  And twigs of maple and a bunch of wild orange and chestnut,
  And stems of currants and plum-blows, and the aromatic cedar,	  And stems of currants and plum-blows, and the aromatic cedar,	  And stems of currants and plum-blows, and the aromatic cedar,	  And stems of currants and plum-blows, and the aromatic cedar,
  These I compass'd around by a thick cloud of spirits,	  These I compass'd around by a thick cloud of spirits,	  These I compass'd around by a thick cloud of spirits,	  These I compass'd around by a thick cloud of spirits,
  Wandering, point to or touch as I pass, or throw them loosely from me,	  Wandering, point to or touch as I pass, or throw them loosely from me,	  Wandering, point to or touch as I pass, or throw them loosely from me,	  Wandering, point to or touch as I pass, or throw them loosely from me,
  Indicating to each one what he shall have, giving something to each;	  Indicating to each one what he shall have, giving something to each;	  Indicating to each one what he shall have, giving something to each;	  Indicating to each one what he shall have, giving something to each;
  But what I drew from the water by the pond-side, that I reserve,	  But what I drew from the water by the pond-side, that I reserve,	  But what I drew from the water by the pond-side, that I reserve,	  But what I drew from the water by the pond-side, that I reserve,
  I will give of it, but only to them that love as I myself am capable	  I will give of it, but only to them that love as I myself am capable	  I will give of it, but only to them that love as I myself am capable	  I will give of it, but only to them that love as I myself am capable
      of loving.	      of loving.	      of loving.	      of loving.
			
			
			
			
Not Heaving from My Ribb'd Breast Only	Not Heaving from My Ribb'd Breast Only	Not Heaving from My Ribb'd Breast Only	Not Heaving from My Ribb'd Breast Only
			
  Not heaving from my ribb'd breast only,	  Not heaving from my ribb'd breast only,	  Not heaving from my ribb'd breast only,	  Not heaving from my ribb'd breast only,
  Not in sighs at night in rage dissatisfied with myself,	  Not in sighs at night in rage dissatisfied with myself,	  Not in sighs at night in rage dissatisfied with myself,	  Not in sighs at night in rage dissatisfied with myself,
  Not in those long-drawn, ill-supprest sighs,	  Not in those long-drawn, ill-supprest sighs,	  Not in those long-drawn, ill-supprest sighs,	  Not in those long-drawn, ill-supprest sighs,
  Not in many an oath and promise broken,	  Not in many an oath and promise broken,	  Not in many an oath and promise broken,	  Not in many an oath and promise broken,
  Not in my wilful and savage soul's volition,	  Not in my wilful and savage soul's volition,	  Not in my wilful and savage soul's volition,	  Not in my wilful and savage soul's volition,
  Not in the subtle nourishment of the air,	  Not in the subtle nourishment of the air,	  Not in the subtle nourishment of the air,	  Not in the subtle nourishment of the air,
  Not in this beating and pounding at my temples and wrists,	  Not in this beating and pounding at my temples and wrists,	  Not in this beating and pounding at my temples and wrists,	  Not in this beating and pounding at my temples and wrists,
  Not in the curious systole and diastole within which will one day cease,	  Not in the curious systole and diastole within which will one day cease,	  Not in the curious systole and diastole within which will one day cease,	  Not in the curious systole and diastole within which will one day cease,
  Not in many a hungry wish told to the skies only,	  Not in many a hungry wish told to the skies only,	  Not in many a hungry wish told to the skies only,	  Not in many a hungry wish told to the skies only,
  Not in cries, laughter, defiancies, thrown from me when alone far in	  Not in cries, laughter, defiancies, thrown from me when alone far in	  Not in cries, laughter, defiancies, thrown from me when alone far in	  Not in cries, laughter, defiancies, thrown from me when alone far in
      the wilds,	      the wilds,	      the wilds,	      the wilds,
  Not in husky pantings through clinch'd teeth,	  Not in husky pantings through clinch'd teeth,	  Not in husky pantings through clinch'd teeth,	  Not in husky pantings through clinch'd teeth,
  Not in sounded and resounded words, chattering words, echoes, dead words,	  Not in sounded and resounded words, chattering words, echoes, dead words,	  Not in sounded and resounded words, chattering words, echoes, dead words,	  Not in sounded and resounded words, chattering words, echoes, dead words,
  Not in the murmurs of my dreams while I sleep,	  Not in the murmurs of my dreams while I sleep,	  Not in the murmurs of my dreams while I sleep,	  Not in the murmurs of my dreams while I sleep,
  Nor the other murmurs of these incredible dreams of every day,	  Nor the other murmurs of these incredible dreams of every day,	  Nor the other murmurs of these incredible dreams of every day,	  Nor the other murmurs of these incredible dreams of every day,
  Nor in the limbs and senses of my body that take you and dismiss you	  Nor in the limbs and senses of my body that take you and dismiss you	  Nor in the limbs and senses of my body that take you and dismiss you	  Nor in the limbs and senses of my body that take you and dismiss you
      continually--not there,	      continually--not there,	      continually--not there,	      continually--not there,
  Not in any or all of them O adhesiveness! O pulse of my life!	  Not in any or all of them O adhesiveness! O pulse of my life!	  Not in any or all of them O adhesiveness! O pulse of my life!	  Not in any or all of them O adhesiveness! O pulse of my life!
  Need I that you exist and show yourself any more than in these songs.	  Need I that you exist and show yourself any more than in these songs.	  Need I that you exist and show yourself any more than in these songs.	  Need I that you exist and show yourself any more than in these songs.
			
			
			
			
Of the Terrible Doubt of Appearances	Of the Terrible Doubt of Appearances	Of the Terrible Doubt of Appearances	Of the Terrible Doubt of Appearances
			
  Of the terrible doubt of appearances,	  Of the terrible doubt of appearances,	  Of the terrible doubt of appearances,	  Of the terrible doubt of appearances,
  Of the uncertainty after all, that we may be deluded,	  Of the uncertainty after all, that we may be deluded,	  Of the uncertainty after all, that we may be deluded,	  Of the uncertainty after all, that we may be deluded,
  That may-be reliance and hope are but speculations after all,	  That may-be reliance and hope are but speculations after all,	  That may-be reliance and hope are but speculations after all,	  That may-be reliance and hope are but speculations after all,
  That may-be identity beyond the grave is a beautiful fable only,	  That may-be identity beyond the grave is a beautiful fable only,	  That may-be identity beyond the grave is a beautiful fable only,	  That may-be identity beyond the grave is a beautiful fable only,
  May-be the things I perceive, the animals, plants, men, hills,	  May-be the things I perceive, the animals, plants, men, hills,	  May-be the things I perceive, the animals, plants, men, hills,	  May-be the things I perceive, the animals, plants, men, hills,
      shining and flowing waters,	      shining and flowing waters,	      shining and flowing waters,	      shining and flowing waters,
  The skies of day and night, colors, densities, forms, may-be these	  The skies of day and night, colors, densities, forms, may-be these	  The skies of day and night, colors, densities, forms, may-be these	  The skies of day and night, colors, densities, forms, may-be these
      are (as doubtless they are) only apparitions, and the real	      are (as doubtless they are) only apparitions, and the real	      are (as doubtless they are) only apparitions, and the real	      are (as doubtless they are) only apparitions, and the real
      something has yet to be known,	      something has yet to be known,	      something has yet to be known,	      something has yet to be known,
  (How often they dart out of themselves as if to confound me and mock me!	  (How often they dart out of themselves as if to confound me and mock me!	  (How often they dart out of themselves as if to confound me and mock me!	  (How often they dart out of themselves as if to confound me and mock me!
  How often I think neither I know, nor any man knows, aught of them,)	  How often I think neither I know, nor any man knows, aught of them,)	  How often I think neither I know, nor any man knows, aught of them,)	  How often I think neither I know, nor any man knows, aught of them,)
  May-be seeming to me what they are (as doubtless they indeed but seem)	  May-be seeming to me what they are (as doubtless they indeed but seem)	  May-be seeming to me what they are (as doubtless they indeed but seem)	  May-be seeming to me what they are (as doubtless they indeed but seem)
      as from my present point of view, and might prove (as of course they	      as from my present point of view, and might prove (as of course they	      as from my present point of view, and might prove (as of course they	      as from my present point of view, and might prove (as of course they
      would) nought of what they appear, or nought anyhow, from entirely	      would) nought of what they appear, or nought anyhow, from entirely	      would) nought of what they appear, or nought anyhow, from entirely	      would) nought of what they appear, or nought anyhow, from entirely
      changed points of view;	      changed points of view;	      changed points of view;	      changed points of view;
  To me these and the like of these are curiously answer'd by my	  To me these and the like of these are curiously answer'd by my	  To me these and the like of these are curiously answer'd by my	  To me these and the like of these are curiously answer'd by my
      lovers, my dear friends,	      lovers, my dear friends,	      lovers, my dear friends,	      lovers, my dear friends,
  When he whom I love travels with me or sits a long while holding me	  When he whom I love travels with me or sits a long while holding me	  When he whom I love travels with me or sits a long while holding me	  When he whom I love travels with me or sits a long while holding me
      by the hand,	      by the hand,	      by the hand,	      by the hand,
  When the subtle air, the impalpable, the sense that words and reason	  When the subtle air, the impalpable, the sense that words and reason	  When the subtle air, the impalpable, the sense that words and reason	  When the subtle air, the impalpable, the sense that words and reason
      hold not, surround us and pervade us,	      hold not, surround us and pervade us,	      hold not, surround us and pervade us,	      hold not, surround us and pervade us,
  Then I am charged with untold and untellable wisdom, I am silent, I	  Then I am charged with untold and untellable wisdom, I am silent, I	  Then I am charged with untold and untellable wisdom, I am silent, I	  Then I am charged with untold and untellable wisdom, I am silent, I
      require nothing further,	      require nothing further,	      require nothing further,	      require nothing further,
  I cannot answer the question of appearances or that of identity	  I cannot answer the question of appearances or that of identity	  I cannot answer the question of appearances or that of identity	  I cannot answer the question of appearances or that of identity
      beyond the grave,	      beyond the grave,	      beyond the grave,	      beyond the grave,
  But I walk or sit indifferent, I am satisfied,	  But I walk or sit indifferent, I am satisfied,	  But I walk or sit indifferent, I am satisfied,	  But I walk or sit indifferent, I am satisfied,
  He ahold of my hand has completely satisfied me.	  He ahold of my hand has completely satisfied me.	  He ahold of my hand has completely satisfied me.	  He ahold of my hand has completely satisfied me.
			
			
			
			
The Base of All Metaphysics	The Base of All Metaphysics	The Base of All Metaphysics	The Base of All Metaphysics
			
  And now gentlemen,	  And now gentlemen,	  And now gentlemen,	  And now gentlemen,
  A word I give to remain in your memories and minds,	  A word I give to remain in your memories and minds,	  A word I give to remain in your memories and minds,	  A word I give to remain in your memories and minds,
  As base and finale too for all metaphysics.	  As base and finale too for all metaphysics.	  As base and finale too for all metaphysics.	  As base and finale too for all metaphysics.
			
  (So to the students the old professor,	  (So to the students the old professor,	  (So to the students the old professor,	  (So to the students the old professor,
  At the close of his crowded course.)	  At the close of his crowded course.)	  At the close of his crowded course.)	  At the close of his crowded course.)
			
  Having studied the new and antique, the Greek and Germanic systems,	  Having studied the new and antique, the Greek and Germanic systems,	  Having studied the new and antique, the Greek and Germanic systems,	  Having studied the new and antique, the Greek and Germanic systems,
  Kant having studied and stated, Fichte and Schelling and Hegel,	  Kant having studied and stated, Fichte and Schelling and Hegel,	  Kant having studied and stated, Fichte and Schelling and Hegel,	  Kant having studied and stated, Fichte and Schelling and Hegel,
  Stated the lore of Plato, and Socrates greater than Plato,	  Stated the lore of Plato, and Socrates greater than Plato,	  Stated the lore of Plato, and Socrates greater than Plato,	  Stated the lore of Plato, and Socrates greater than Plato,
  And greater than Socrates sought and stated, Christ divine having	  And greater than Socrates sought and stated, Christ divine having	  And greater than Socrates sought and stated, Christ divine having	  And greater than Socrates sought and stated, Christ divine having
      studied long,	      studied long,	      studied long,	      studied long,
  I see reminiscent to-day those Greek and Germanic systems,	  I see reminiscent to-day those Greek and Germanic systems,	  I see reminiscent to-day those Greek and Germanic systems,	  I see reminiscent to-day those Greek and Germanic systems,
  See the philosophies all, Christian churches and tenets see,	  See the philosophies all, Christian churches and tenets see,	  See the philosophies all, Christian churches and tenets see,	  See the philosophies all, Christian churches and tenets see,
  Yet underneath Socrates clearly see, and underneath Christ the divine I see,	  Yet underneath Socrates clearly see, and underneath Christ the divine I see,	  Yet underneath Socrates clearly see, and underneath Christ the divine I see,	  Yet underneath Socrates clearly see, and underneath Christ the divine I see,
  The dear love of man for his comrade, the attraction of friend to friend,	  The dear love of man for his comrade, the attraction of friend to friend,	  The dear love of man for his comrade, the attraction of friend to friend,	  The dear love of man for his comrade, the attraction of friend to friend,
  Of the well-married husband and wife, of children and parents,	  Of the well-married husband and wife, of children and parents,	  Of the well-married husband and wife, of children and parents,	  Of the well-married husband and wife, of children and parents,
  Of city for city and land for land.	  Of city for city and land for land.	  Of city for city and land for land.	  Of city for city and land for land.
			
			
			
			
Recorders Ages Hence	Recorders Ages Hence	Recorders Ages Hence	Recorders Ages Hence
			
  Recorders ages hence,	  Recorders ages hence,	  Recorders ages hence,	  Recorders ages hence,
  Come, I will take you down underneath this impassive exterior, I	  Come, I will take you down underneath this impassive exterior, I	  Come, I will take you down underneath this impassive exterior, I	  Come, I will take you down underneath this impassive exterior, I
      will tell you what to say of me,	      will tell you what to say of me,	      will tell you what to say of me,	      will tell you what to say of me,
  Publish my name and hang up my picture as that of the tenderest lover,	  Publish my name and hang up my picture as that of the tenderest lover,	  Publish my name and hang up my picture as that of the tenderest lover,	  Publish my name and hang up my picture as that of the tenderest lover,
  The friend the lover's portrait, of whom his friend his lover was fondest,	  The friend the lover's portrait, of whom his friend his lover was fondest,	  The friend the lover's portrait, of whom his friend his lover was fondest,	  The friend the lover's portrait, of whom his friend his lover was fondest,
  Who was not proud of his songs, but of the measureless ocean of love	  Who was not proud of his songs, but of the measureless ocean of love	  Who was not proud of his songs, but of the measureless ocean of love	  Who was not proud of his songs, but of the measureless ocean of love
      within him, and freely pour'd it forth,	      within him, and freely pour'd it forth,	      within him, and freely pour'd it forth,	      within him, and freely pour'd it forth,
  Who often walk'd lonesome walks thinking of his dear friends, his lovers,	  Who often walk'd lonesome walks thinking of his dear friends, his lovers,	  Who often walk'd lonesome walks thinking of his dear friends, his lovers,	  Who often walk'd lonesome walks thinking of his dear friends, his lovers,
  Who pensive away from one he lov'd often lay sleepless and	  Who pensive away from one he lov'd often lay sleepless and	  Who pensive away from one he lov'd often lay sleepless and	  Who pensive away from one he lov'd often lay sleepless and
      dissatisfied at night,	      dissatisfied at night,	      dissatisfied at night,	      dissatisfied at night,
  Who knew too well the sick, sick dread lest the one he lov'd might	  Who knew too well the sick, sick dread lest the one he lov'd might	  Who knew too well the sick, sick dread lest the one he lov'd might	  Who knew too well the sick, sick dread lest the one he lov'd might
      secretly be indifferent to him,	      secretly be indifferent to him,	      secretly be indifferent to him,	      secretly be indifferent to him,
  Whose happiest days were far away through fields, in woods, on hills,	  Whose happiest days were far away through fields, in woods, on hills,	  Whose happiest days were far away through fields, in woods, on hills,	  Whose happiest days were far away through fields, in woods, on hills,
      he and another wandering hand in hand, they twain apart from other men,	      he and another wandering hand in hand, they twain apart from other men,	      he and another wandering hand in hand, they twain apart from other men,	      he and another wandering hand in hand, they twain apart from other men,
  Who oft as he saunter'd the streets curv'd with his arm the shoulder	  Who oft as he saunter'd the streets curv'd with his arm the shoulder	  Who oft as he saunter'd the streets curv'd with his arm the shoulder	  Who oft as he saunter'd the streets curv'd with his arm the shoulder
      of his friend, while the arm of his friend rested upon him also.	      of his friend, while the arm of his friend rested upon him also.	      of his friend, while the arm of his friend rested upon him also.	      of his friend, while the arm of his friend rested upon him also.
			
			
			
			
When I Heard at the Close of the Day	When I Heard at the Close of the Day	When I Heard at the Close of the Day	When I Heard at the Close of the Day
			
  When I heard at the close of the day how my name had been receiv'd	  When I heard at the close of the day how my name had been receiv'd	  When I heard at the close of the day how my name had been receiv'd	  When I heard at the close of the day how my name had been receiv'd
      with plaudits in the capitol, still it was not a happy night for	      with plaudits in the capitol, still it was not a happy night for	      with plaudits in the capitol, still it was not a happy night for	      with plaudits in the capitol, still it was not a happy night for
      me that follow'd,	      me that follow'd,	      me that follow'd,	      me that follow'd,
  And else when I carous'd, or when my plans were accomplish'd, still	  And else when I carous'd, or when my plans were accomplish'd, still	  And else when I carous'd, or when my plans were accomplish'd, still	  And else when I carous'd, or when my plans were accomplish'd, still
      I was not happy,	      I was not happy,	      I was not happy,	      I was not happy,
  But the day when I rose at dawn from the bed of perfect health,	  But the day when I rose at dawn from the bed of perfect health,	  But the day when I rose at dawn from the bed of perfect health,	  But the day when I rose at dawn from the bed of perfect health,
      refresh'd, singing, inhaling the ripe breath of autumn,	      refresh'd, singing, inhaling the ripe breath of autumn,	      refresh'd, singing, inhaling the ripe breath of autumn,	      refresh'd, singing, inhaling the ripe breath of autumn,
  When I saw the full moon in the west grow pale and disappear in the	  When I saw the full moon in the west grow pale and disappear in the	  When I saw the full moon in the west grow pale and disappear in the	  When I saw the full moon in the west grow pale and disappear in the
      morning light,	      morning light,	      morning light,	      morning light,
  When I wander'd alone over the beach, and undressing bathed,	  When I wander'd alone over the beach, and undressing bathed,	  When I wander'd alone over the beach, and undressing bathed,	  When I wander'd alone over the beach, and undressing bathed,
      laughing with the cool waters, and saw the sun rise,	      laughing with the cool waters, and saw the sun rise,	      laughing with the cool waters, and saw the sun rise,	      laughing with the cool waters, and saw the sun rise,
  And when I thought how my dear friend my lover was on his way	  And when I thought how my dear friend my lover was on his way	  And when I thought how my dear friend my lover was on his way	  And when I thought how my dear friend my lover was on his way
      coming, O then I was happy,	      coming, O then I was happy,	      coming, O then I was happy,	      coming, O then I was happy,
  O then each breath tasted sweeter, and all that day my food	  O then each breath tasted sweeter, and all that day my food	  O then each breath tasted sweeter, and all that day my food	  O then each breath tasted sweeter, and all that day my food
      nourish'd me more, and the beautiful day pass'd well,	      nourish'd me more, and the beautiful day pass'd well,	      nourish'd me more, and the beautiful day pass'd well,	      nourish'd me more, and the beautiful day pass'd well,
  And the next came with equal joy, and with the next at evening came	  And the next came with equal joy, and with the next at evening came	  And the next came with equal joy, and with the next at evening came	  And the next came with equal joy, and with the next at evening came
      my friend,	      my friend,	      my friend,	      my friend,
  And that night while all was still I heard the waters roll slowly	  And that night while all was still I heard the waters roll slowly	  And that night while all was still I heard the waters roll slowly	  And that night while all was still I heard the waters roll slowly
      continually up the shores,	      continually up the shores,	      continually up the shores,	      continually up the shores,
  I heard the hissing rustle of the liquid and sands as directed to me	  I heard the hissing rustle of the liquid and sands as directed to me	  I heard the hissing rustle of the liquid and sands as directed to me	  I heard the hissing rustle of the liquid and sands as directed to me
      whispering to congratulate me,	      whispering to congratulate me,	      whispering to congratulate me,	      whispering to congratulate me,
  For the one I love most lay sleeping by me under the same cover in	  For the one I love most lay sleeping by me under the same cover in	  For the one I love most lay sleeping by me under the same cover in	  For the one I love most lay sleeping by me under the same cover in
      the cool night,	      the cool night,	      the cool night,	      the cool night,
  In the stillness in the autumn moonbeams his face was inclined toward me,	  In the stillness in the autumn moonbeams his face was inclined toward me,	  In the stillness in the autumn moonbeams his face was inclined toward me,	  In the stillness in the autumn moonbeams his face was inclined toward me,
  And his arm lay lightly around my breast--and that night I was happy.	  And his arm lay lightly around my breast--and that night I was happy.	  And his arm lay lightly around my breast--and that night I was happy.	  And his arm lay lightly around my breast--and that night I was happy.
			
			
			
			
Are You the New Person Drawn Toward Me?	Are You the New Person Drawn Toward Me?	Are You the New Person Drawn Toward Me?	Are You the New Person Drawn Toward Me?
			
  Are you the new person drawn toward me?	  Are you the new person drawn toward me?	  Are you the new person drawn toward me?	  Are you the new person drawn toward me?
  To begin with take warning, I am surely far different from what you suppose;	  To begin with take warning, I am surely far different from what you suppose;	  To begin with take warning, I am surely far different from what you suppose;	  To begin with take warning, I am surely far different from what you suppose;
  Do you suppose you will find in me your ideal?	  Do you suppose you will find in me your ideal?	  Do you suppose you will find in me your ideal?	  Do you suppose you will find in me your ideal?
  Do you think it so easy to have me become your lover?	  Do you think it so easy to have me become your lover?	  Do you think it so easy to have me become your lover?	  Do you think it so easy to have me become your lover?
  Do you think the friendship of me would be unalloy'd satisfaction?	  Do you think the friendship of me would be unalloy'd satisfaction?	  Do you think the friendship of me would be unalloy'd satisfaction?	  Do you think the friendship of me would be unalloy'd satisfaction?
  Do you think I am trusty and faithful?	  Do you think I am trusty and faithful?	  Do you think I am trusty and faithful?	  Do you think I am trusty and faithful?
  Do you see no further than this facade, this smooth and tolerant	  Do you see no further than this facade, this smooth and tolerant	  Do you see no further than this facade, this smooth and tolerant	  Do you see no further than this facade, this smooth and tolerant
      manner of me?	      manner of me?	      manner of me?	      manner of me?
  Do you suppose yourself advancing on real ground toward a real heroic man?	  Do you suppose yourself advancing on real ground toward a real heroic man?	  Do you suppose yourself advancing on real ground toward a real heroic man?	  Do you suppose yourself advancing on real ground toward a real heroic man?
  Have you no thought O dreamer that it may be all maya, illusion?	  Have you no thought O dreamer that it may be all maya, illusion?	  Have you no thought O dreamer that it may be all maya, illusion?	  Have you no thought O dreamer that it may be all maya, illusion?
			
			
			
			
Roots and Leaves Themselves Alone	Roots and Leaves Themselves Alone	Roots and Leaves Themselves Alone	Roots and Leaves Themselves Alone
			
  Roots and leaves themselves alone are these,	  Roots and leaves themselves alone are these,	  Roots and leaves themselves alone are these,	  Roots and leaves themselves alone are these,
  Scents brought to men and women from the wild woods and pond-side,	  Scents brought to men and women from the wild woods and pond-side,	  Scents brought to men and women from the wild woods and pond-side,	  Scents brought to men and women from the wild woods and pond-side,
  Breast-sorrel and pinks of love, fingers that wind around tighter	  Breast-sorrel and pinks of love, fingers that wind around tighter	  Breast-sorrel and pinks of love, fingers that wind around tighter	  Breast-sorrel and pinks of love, fingers that wind around tighter
      than vines,	      than vines,	      than vines,	      than vines,
  Gushes from the throats of birds hid in the foliage of trees as the	  Gushes from the throats of birds hid in the foliage of trees as the	  Gushes from the throats of birds hid in the foliage of trees as the	  Gushes from the throats of birds hid in the foliage of trees as the
      sun is risen,	      sun is risen,	      sun is risen,	      sun is risen,
  Breezes of land and love set from living shores to you on the living	  Breezes of land and love set from living shores to you on the living	  Breezes of land and love set from living shores to you on the living	  Breezes of land and love set from living shores to you on the living
      sea, to you O sailors!	      sea, to you O sailors!	      sea, to you O sailors!	      sea, to you O sailors!
  Frost-mellow'd berries and Third-month twigs offer'd fresh to young	  Frost-mellow'd berries and Third-month twigs offer'd fresh to young	  Frost-mellow'd berries and Third-month twigs offer'd fresh to young	  Frost-mellow'd berries and Third-month twigs offer'd fresh to young
      persons wandering out in the fields when the winter breaks up,	      persons wandering out in the fields when the winter breaks up,	      persons wandering out in the fields when the winter breaks up,	      persons wandering out in the fields when the winter breaks up,
  Love-buds put before you and within you whoever you are,	  Love-buds put before you and within you whoever you are,	  Love-buds put before you and within you whoever you are,	  Love-buds put before you and within you whoever you are,
  Buds to be unfolded on the old terms,	  Buds to be unfolded on the old terms,	  Buds to be unfolded on the old terms,	  Buds to be unfolded on the old terms,
  If you bring the warmth of the sun to them they will open and bring	  If you bring the warmth of the sun to them they will open and bring	  If you bring the warmth of the sun to them they will open and bring	  If you bring the warmth of the sun to them they will open and bring
      form, color, perfume, to you,	      form, color, perfume, to you,	      form, color, perfume, to you,	      form, color, perfume, to you,
  If you become the aliment and the wet they will become flowers,	  If you become the aliment and the wet they will become flowers,	  If you become the aliment and the wet they will become flowers,	  If you become the aliment and the wet they will become flowers,
      fruits, tall branches and trees.	      fruits, tall branches and trees.	      fruits, tall branches and trees.	      fruits, tall branches and trees.
			
			
			
			
Not Heat Flames Up and Consumes	Not Heat Flames Up and Consumes	Not Heat Flames Up and Consumes	Not Heat Flames Up and Consumes
			
  Not heat flames up and consumes,	  Not heat flames up and consumes,	  Not heat flames up and consumes,	  Not heat flames up and consumes,
  Not sea-waves hurry in and out,	  Not sea-waves hurry in and out,	  Not sea-waves hurry in and out,	  Not sea-waves hurry in and out,
  Not the air delicious and dry, the air of ripe summer, bears lightly	  Not the air delicious and dry, the air of ripe summer, bears lightly	  Not the air delicious and dry, the air of ripe summer, bears lightly	  Not the air delicious and dry, the air of ripe summer, bears lightly
      along white down-balls of myriads of seeds,	      along white down-balls of myriads of seeds,	      along white down-balls of myriads of seeds,	      along white down-balls of myriads of seeds,
  Waited, sailing gracefully, to drop where they may;	  Waited, sailing gracefully, to drop where they may;	  Waited, sailing gracefully, to drop where they may;	  Waited, sailing gracefully, to drop where they may;
  Not these, O none of these more than the flames of me, consuming,	  Not these, O none of these more than the flames of me, consuming,	  Not these, O none of these more than the flames of me, consuming,	  Not these, O none of these more than the flames of me, consuming,
      burning for his love whom I love,	      burning for his love whom I love,	      burning for his love whom I love,	      burning for his love whom I love,
  O none more than I hurrying in and out;	  O none more than I hurrying in and out;	  O none more than I hurrying in and out;	  O none more than I hurrying in and out;
  Does the tide hurry, seeking something, and never give up? O I the same,	  Does the tide hurry, seeking something, and never give up? O I the same,	  Does the tide hurry, seeking something, and never give up? O I the same,	  Does the tide hurry, seeking something, and never give up? O I the same,
  O nor down-balls nor perfumes, nor the high rain-emitting clouds,	  O nor down-balls nor perfumes, nor the high rain-emitting clouds,	  O nor down-balls nor perfumes, nor the high rain-emitting clouds,	  O nor down-balls nor perfumes, nor the high rain-emitting clouds,
      are borne through the open air,	      are borne through the open air,	      are borne through the open air,	      are borne through the open air,
  Any more than my soul is borne through the open air,	  Any more than my soul is borne through the open air,	  Any more than my soul is borne through the open air,	  Any more than my soul is borne through the open air,
  Wafted in all directions O love, for friendship, for you.	  Wafted in all directions O love, for friendship, for you.	  Wafted in all directions O love, for friendship, for you.	  Wafted in all directions O love, for friendship, for you.
			
			
			
			
Trickle Drops	Trickle Drops	Trickle Drops	Trickle Drops
			
  Trickle drops! my blue veins leaving!	  Trickle drops! my blue veins leaving!	  Trickle drops! my blue veins leaving!	  Trickle drops! my blue veins leaving!
  O drops of me! trickle, slow drops,	  O drops of me! trickle, slow drops,	  O drops of me! trickle, slow drops,	  O drops of me! trickle, slow drops,
  Candid from me falling, drip, bleeding drops,	  Candid from me falling, drip, bleeding drops,	  Candid from me falling, drip, bleeding drops,	  Candid from me falling, drip, bleeding drops,
  From wounds made to free you whence you were prison'd,	  From wounds made to free you whence you were prison'd,	  From wounds made to free you whence you were prison'd,	  From wounds made to free you whence you were prison'd,
  From my face, from my forehead and lips,	  From my face, from my forehead and lips,	  From my face, from my forehead and lips,	  From my face, from my forehead and lips,
  From my breast, from within where I was conceal'd, press forth red	  From my breast, from within where I was conceal'd, press forth red	  From my breast, from within where I was conceal'd, press forth red	  From my breast, from within where I was conceal'd, press forth red
      drops, confession drops,	      drops, confession drops,	      drops, confession drops,	      drops, confession drops,
  Stain every page, stain every song I sing, every word I say, bloody drops,	  Stain every page, stain every song I sing, every word I say, bloody drops,	  Stain every page, stain every song I sing, every word I say, bloody drops,	  Stain every page, stain every song I sing, every word I say, bloody drops,
  Let them know your scarlet heat, let them glisten,	  Let them know your scarlet heat, let them glisten,	  Let them know your scarlet heat, let them glisten,	  Let them know your scarlet heat, let them glisten,
  Saturate them with yourself all ashamed and wet,	  Saturate them with yourself all ashamed and wet,	  Saturate them with yourself all ashamed and wet,	  Saturate them with yourself all ashamed and wet,
  Glow upon all I have written or shall write, bleeding drops,	  Glow upon all I have written or shall write, bleeding drops,	  Glow upon all I have written or shall write, bleeding drops,	  Glow upon all I have written or shall write, bleeding drops,
  Let it all be seen in your light, blushing drops.	  Let it all be seen in your light, blushing drops.	  Let it all be seen in your light, blushing drops.	  Let it all be seen in your light, blushing drops.
			
			
			
			
City of Orgies	City of Orgies	City of Orgies	City of Orgies
			
  City of orgies, walks and joys,	  City of orgies, walks and joys,	  City of orgies, walks and joys,	  City of orgies, walks and joys,
  City whom that I have lived and sung in your midst will one day make	  City whom that I have lived and sung in your midst will one day make	  City whom that I have lived and sung in your midst will one day make	  City whom that I have lived and sung in your midst will one day make
  Not the pageants of you, not your shifting tableaus, your	  Not the pageants of you, not your shifting tableaus, your	  Not the pageants of you, not your shifting tableaus, your	  Not the pageants of you, not your shifting tableaus, your
      spectacles, repay me,	      spectacles, repay me,	      spectacles, repay me,	      spectacles, repay me,
  Not the interminable rows of your houses, nor the ships at the wharves,	  Not the interminable rows of your houses, nor the ships at the wharves,	  Not the interminable rows of your houses, nor the ships at the wharves,	  Not the interminable rows of your houses, nor the ships at the wharves,
  Nor the processions in the streets, nor the bright windows with	  Nor the processions in the streets, nor the bright windows with	  Nor the processions in the streets, nor the bright windows with	  Nor the processions in the streets, nor the bright windows with
      goods in them,	      goods in them,	      goods in them,	      goods in them,
  Nor to converse with learn'd persons, or bear my share in the soiree	  Nor to converse with learn'd persons, or bear my share in the soiree	  Nor to converse with learn'd persons, or bear my share in the soiree	  Nor to converse with learn'd persons, or bear my share in the soiree
      or feast;	      or feast;	      or feast;	      or feast;
  Not those, but as I pass O Manhattan, your frequent and swift flash	  Not those, but as I pass O Manhattan, your frequent and swift flash	  Not those, but as I pass O Manhattan, your frequent and swift flash	  Not those, but as I pass O Manhattan, your frequent and swift flash
      of eyes offering me love,	      of eyes offering me love,	      of eyes offering me love,	      of eyes offering me love,
  Offering response to my own--these repay me,	  Offering response to my own--these repay me,	  Offering response to my own--these repay me,	  Offering response to my own--these repay me,
  Lovers, continual lovers, only repay me.	  Lovers, continual lovers, only repay me.	  Lovers, continual lovers, only repay me.	  Lovers, continual lovers, only repay me.
			
			
			
			
Behold This Swarthy Face	Behold This Swarthy Face	Behold This Swarthy Face	Behold This Swarthy Face
			
  Behold this swarthy face, these gray eyes,	  Behold this swarthy face, these gray eyes,	  Behold this swarthy face, these gray eyes,	  Behold this swarthy face, these gray eyes,
  This beard, the white wool unclipt upon my neck,	  This beard, the white wool unclipt upon my neck,	  This beard, the white wool unclipt upon my neck,	  This beard, the white wool unclipt upon my neck,
  My brown hands and the silent manner of me without charm;	  My brown hands and the silent manner of me without charm;	  My brown hands and the silent manner of me without charm;	  My brown hands and the silent manner of me without charm;
  Yet comes one a Manhattanese and ever at parting kisses me lightly	  Yet comes one a Manhattanese and ever at parting kisses me lightly	  Yet comes one a Manhattanese and ever at parting kisses me lightly	  Yet comes one a Manhattanese and ever at parting kisses me lightly
      on the lips with robust love,	      on the lips with robust love,	      on the lips with robust love,	      on the lips with robust love,
  And I on the crossing of the street or on the ship's deck give a	  And I on the crossing of the street or on the ship's deck give a	  And I on the crossing of the street or on the ship's deck give a	  And I on the crossing of the street or on the ship's deck give a
      kiss in return,	      kiss in return,	      kiss in return,	      kiss in return,
  We observe that salute of American comrades land and sea,	  We observe that salute of American comrades land and sea,	  We observe that salute of American comrades land and sea,	  We observe that salute of American comrades land and sea,
  We are those two natural and nonchalant persons.	  We are those two natural and nonchalant persons.	  We are those two natural and nonchalant persons.	  We are those two natural and nonchalant persons.
			
			
			
			
I Saw in Louisiana a Live-Oak Growing	I Saw in Louisiana a Live-Oak Growing	I Saw in Louisiana a Live-Oak Growing	I Saw in Louisiana a Live-Oak Growing
			
  I saw in Louisiana a live-oak growing,	  I saw in Louisiana a live-oak growing,	  I saw in Louisiana a live-oak growing,	  I saw in Louisiana a live-oak growing,
  All alone stood it and the moss hung down from the branches,	  All alone stood it and the moss hung down from the branches,	  All alone stood it and the moss hung down from the branches,	  All alone stood it and the moss hung down from the branches,
  Without any companion it grew there uttering joyous of dark green,	  Without any companion it grew there uttering joyous of dark green,	  Without any companion it grew there uttering joyous of dark green,	  Without any companion it grew there uttering joyous of dark green,
  And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself,	  And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself,	  And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself,	  And its look, rude, unbending, lusty, made me think of myself,
  But I wonder'd how it could utter joyous leaves standing alone there	  But I wonder'd how it could utter joyous leaves standing alone there	  But I wonder'd how it could utter joyous leaves standing alone there	  But I wonder'd how it could utter joyous leaves standing alone there
      without its friend near, for I knew I could not,	      without its friend near, for I knew I could not,	      without its friend near, for I knew I could not,	      without its friend near, for I knew I could not,
  And I broke off a twig with a certain number of leaves upon it and	  And I broke off a twig with a certain number of leaves upon it and	  And I broke off a twig with a certain number of leaves upon it and	  And I broke off a twig with a certain number of leaves upon it and
      twined around it a little moss,	      twined around it a little moss,	      twined around it a little moss,	      twined around it a little moss,
  And brought it away, and I have placed it in sight in my room,	  And brought it away, and I have placed it in sight in my room,	  And brought it away, and I have placed it in sight in my room,	  And brought it away, and I have placed it in sight in my room,
  It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear friends,	  It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear friends,	  It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear friends,	  It is not needed to remind me as of my own dear friends,
  (For I believe lately I think of little else than of them,)	  (For I believe lately I think of little else than of them,)	  (For I believe lately I think of little else than of them,)	  (For I believe lately I think of little else than of them,)
  Yet it remains to me a curious token, it makes me think of manly love;	  Yet it remains to me a curious token, it makes me think of manly love;	  Yet it remains to me a curious token, it makes me think of manly love;	  Yet it remains to me a curious token, it makes me think of manly love;
  For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there in Louisiana	  For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there in Louisiana	  For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there in Louisiana	  For all that, and though the live-oak glistens there in Louisiana
      solitary in a wide in a wide flat space,	      solitary in a wide in a wide flat space,	      solitary in a wide in a wide flat space,	      solitary in a wide in a wide flat space,
  Uttering joyous leaves all its life without a friend a lover near,	  Uttering joyous leaves all its life without a friend a lover near,	  Uttering joyous leaves all its life without a friend a lover near,	  Uttering joyous leaves all its life without a friend a lover near,
  I know very well I could not.	  I know very well I could not.	  I know very well I could not.	  I know very well I could not.
			
			
			
			
To a Stranger	To a Stranger	To a Stranger	To a Stranger
			
  Passing stranger! you do not know how longingly I look upon you,	  Passing stranger! you do not know how longingly I look upon you,	  Passing stranger! you do not know how longingly I look upon you,	  Passing stranger! you do not know how longingly I look upon you,
  You must be he I was seeking, or she I was seeking, (it comes to me	  You must be he I was seeking, or she I was seeking, (it comes to me	  You must be he I was seeking, or she I was seeking, (it comes to me	  You must be he I was seeking, or she I was seeking, (it comes to me
      as of a dream,)	      as of a dream,)	      as of a dream,)	      as of a dream,)
  I have somewhere surely lived a life of joy with you,	  I have somewhere surely lived a life of joy with you,	  I have somewhere surely lived a life of joy with you,	  I have somewhere surely lived a life of joy with you,
  All is recall'd as we flit by each other, fluid, affectionate,	  All is recall'd as we flit by each other, fluid, affectionate,	  All is recall'd as we flit by each other, fluid, affectionate,	  All is recall'd as we flit by each other, fluid, affectionate,
      chaste, matured,	      chaste, matured,	      chaste, matured,	      chaste, matured,
  You grew up with me, were a boy with me or a girl with me,	  You grew up with me, were a boy with me or a girl with me,	  You grew up with me, were a boy with me or a girl with me,	  You grew up with me, were a boy with me or a girl with me,
  I ate with you and slept with you, your body has become not yours	  I ate with you and slept with you, your body has become not yours	  I ate with you and slept with you, your body has become not yours	  I ate with you and slept with you, your body has become not yours
      only nor left my body mine only,	      only nor left my body mine only,	      only nor left my body mine only,	      only nor left my body mine only,
  You give me the pleasure of your eyes, face, flesh, as we pass, you	  You give me the pleasure of your eyes, face, flesh, as we pass, you	  You give me the pleasure of your eyes, face, flesh, as we pass, you	  You give me the pleasure of your eyes, face, flesh, as we pass, you
      take of my beard, breast, hands, in return,	      take of my beard, breast, hands, in return,	      take of my beard, breast, hands, in return,	      take of my beard, breast, hands, in return,
  I am not to speak to you, I am to think of you when I sit alone or	  I am not to speak to you, I am to think of you when I sit alone or	  I am not to speak to you, I am to think of you when I sit alone or	  I am not to speak to you, I am to think of you when I sit alone or
      wake at night alone,	      wake at night alone,	      wake at night alone,	      wake at night alone,
  I am to wait, I do not doubt I am to meet you again,	  I am to wait, I do not doubt I am to meet you again,	  I am to wait, I do not doubt I am to meet you again,	  I am to wait, I do not doubt I am to meet you again,
  I am to see to it that I do not lose you.	  I am to see to it that I do not lose you.	  I am to see to it that I do not lose you.	  I am to see to it that I do not lose you.
			
			
			
			
This Moment Yearning and Thoughtful	This Moment Yearning and Thoughtful	This Moment Yearning and Thoughtful	This Moment Yearning and Thoughtful
			
  This moment yearning and thoughtful sitting alone,	  This moment yearning and thoughtful sitting alone,	  This moment yearning and thoughtful sitting alone,	  This moment yearning and thoughtful sitting alone,
  It seems to me there are other men in other lands yearning and thoughtful,	  It seems to me there are other men in other lands yearning and thoughtful,	  It seems to me there are other men in other lands yearning and thoughtful,	  It seems to me there are other men in other lands yearning and thoughtful,
  It seems to me I can look over and behold them in Germany, Italy,	  It seems to me I can look over and behold them in Germany, Italy,	  It seems to me I can look over and behold them in Germany, Italy,	  It seems to me I can look over and behold them in Germany, Italy,
      France, Spain,	      France, Spain,	      France, Spain,	      France, Spain,
  Or far, far away, in China, or in Russia or talking other dialects,	  Or far, far away, in China, or in Russia or talking other dialects,	  Or far, far away, in China, or in Russia or talking other dialects,	  Or far, far away, in China, or in Russia or talking other dialects,
  And it seems to me if I could know those men I should become	  And it seems to me if I could know those men I should become	  And it seems to me if I could know those men I should become	  And it seems to me if I could know those men I should become
      attached to them as I do to men in my own lands,	      attached to them as I do to men in my own lands,	      attached to them as I do to men in my own lands,	      attached to them as I do to men in my own lands,
  O I know we should be brethren and lovers,	  O I know we should be brethren and lovers,	  O I know we should be brethren and lovers,	  O I know we should be brethren and lovers,
  I know I should be happy with them.	  I know I should be happy with them.	  I know I should be happy with them.	  I know I should be happy with them.
			
			
			
			
I Hear It Was Charged Against Me	I Hear It Was Charged Against Me	I Hear It Was Charged Against Me	I Hear It Was Charged Against Me
			
  I hear it was charged against me that I sought to destroy institutions,	  I hear it was charged against me that I sought to destroy institutions,	  I hear it was charged against me that I sought to destroy institutions,	  I hear it was charged against me that I sought to destroy institutions,
  But really I am neither for nor against institutions,	  But really I am neither for nor against institutions,	  But really I am neither for nor against institutions,	  But really I am neither for nor against institutions,
  (What indeed have I in common with them? or what with the	  (What indeed have I in common with them? or what with the	  (What indeed have I in common with them? or what with the	  (What indeed have I in common with them? or what with the
      destruction of them?)	      destruction of them?)	      destruction of them?)	      destruction of them?)
  Only I will establish in the Mannahatta and in every city of these	  Only I will establish in the Mannahatta and in every city of these	  Only I will establish in the Mannahatta and in every city of these	  Only I will establish in the Mannahatta and in every city of these
      States inland and seaboard,	      States inland and seaboard,	      States inland and seaboard,	      States inland and seaboard,
  And in the fields and woods, and above every keel little or large	  And in the fields and woods, and above every keel little or large	  And in the fields and woods, and above every keel little or large	  And in the fields and woods, and above every keel little or large
      that dents the water,	      that dents the water,	      that dents the water,	      that dents the water,
  Without edifices or rules or trustees or any argument,	  Without edifices or rules or trustees or any argument,	  Without edifices or rules or trustees or any argument,	  Without edifices or rules or trustees or any argument,
  The institution of the dear love of comrades.	  The institution of the dear love of comrades.	  The institution of the dear love of comrades.	  The institution of the dear love of comrades.
			
			
			
			
The Prairie-Grass Dividing	The Prairie-Grass Dividing	The Prairie-Grass Dividing	The Prairie-Grass Dividing
			
  The prairie-grass dividing, its special odor breathing,	  The prairie-grass dividing, its special odor breathing,	  The prairie-grass dividing, its special odor breathing,	  The prairie-grass dividing, its special odor breathing,
  I demand of it the spiritual corresponding,	  I demand of it the spiritual corresponding,	  I demand of it the spiritual corresponding,	  I demand of it the spiritual corresponding,
  Demand the most copious and close companionship of men,	  Demand the most copious and close companionship of men,	  Demand the most copious and close companionship of men,	  Demand the most copious and close companionship of men,
  Demand the blades to rise of words, acts, beings,	  Demand the blades to rise of words, acts, beings,	  Demand the blades to rise of words, acts, beings,	  Demand the blades to rise of words, acts, beings,
  Those of the open atmosphere, coarse, sunlit, fresh, nutritious,	  Those of the open atmosphere, coarse, sunlit, fresh, nutritious,	  Those of the open atmosphere, coarse, sunlit, fresh, nutritious,	  Those of the open atmosphere, coarse, sunlit, fresh, nutritious,
  Those that go their own gait, erect, stepping with freedom and	  Those that go their own gait, erect, stepping with freedom and	  Those that go their own gait, erect, stepping with freedom and	  Those that go their own gait, erect, stepping with freedom and
      command, leading not following,	      command, leading not following,	      command, leading not following,	      command, leading not following,
  Those with a never-quell'd audacity, those with sweet and lusty	  Those with a never-quell'd audacity, those with sweet and lusty	  Those with a never-quell'd audacity, those with sweet and lusty	  Those with a never-quell'd audacity, those with sweet and lusty
      flesh clear of taint,	      flesh clear of taint,	      flesh clear of taint,	      flesh clear of taint,
  Those that look carelessly in the faces of Presidents and governors,	  Those that look carelessly in the faces of Presidents and governors,	  Those that look carelessly in the faces of Presidents and governors,	  Those that look carelessly in the faces of Presidents and governors,
      as to say Who are you?	      as to say Who are you?	      as to say Who are you?	      as to say Who are you?
  Those of earth-born passion, simple, never constrain'd, never obedient,	  Those of earth-born passion, simple, never constrain'd, never obedient,	  Those of earth-born passion, simple, never constrain'd, never obedient,	  Those of earth-born passion, simple, never constrain'd, never obedient,
  Those of inland America.	  Those of inland America.	  Those of inland America.	  Those of inland America.
			
			
			
			
When I Peruse the Conquer'd Fame	When I Peruse the Conquer'd Fame	When I Peruse the Conquer'd Fame	When I Peruse the Conquer'd Fame
			
  When I peruse the conquer'd fame of heroes and the victories of	  When I peruse the conquer'd fame of heroes and the victories of	  When I peruse the conquer'd fame of heroes and the victories of	  When I peruse the conquer'd fame of heroes and the victories of
      mighty generals, I do not envy the generals,	      mighty generals, I do not envy the generals,	      mighty generals, I do not envy the generals,	      mighty generals, I do not envy the generals,
  Nor the President in his Presidency, nor the rich in his great house,	  Nor the President in his Presidency, nor the rich in his great house,	  Nor the President in his Presidency, nor the rich in his great house,	  Nor the President in his Presidency, nor the rich in his great house,
  But when I hear of the brotherhood of lovers, how it was with them,	  But when I hear of the brotherhood of lovers, how it was with them,	  But when I hear of the brotherhood of lovers, how it was with them,	  But when I hear of the brotherhood of lovers, how it was with them,
  How together through life, through dangers, odium, unchanging, long	  How together through life, through dangers, odium, unchanging, long	  How together through life, through dangers, odium, unchanging, long	  How together through life, through dangers, odium, unchanging, long
      and long,	      and long,	      and long,	      and long,
  Through youth and through middle and old age, how unfaltering, how	  Through youth and through middle and old age, how unfaltering, how	  Through youth and through middle and old age, how unfaltering, how	  Through youth and through middle and old age, how unfaltering, how
      affectionate and faithful they were,	      affectionate and faithful they were,	      affectionate and faithful they were,	      affectionate and faithful they were,
  Then I am pensive--I hastily walk away fill'd with the bitterest envy.	  Then I am pensive--I hastily walk away fill'd with the bitterest envy.	  Then I am pensive--I hastily walk away fill'd with the bitterest envy.	  Then I am pensive--I hastily walk away fill'd with the bitterest envy.
			
			
			
			
We Two Boys Together Clinging	We Two Boys Together Clinging	We Two Boys Together Clinging	We Two Boys Together Clinging
			
  We two boys together clinging,	  We two boys together clinging,	  We two boys together clinging,	  We two boys together clinging,
  One the other never leaving,	  One the other never leaving,	  One the other never leaving,	  One the other never leaving,
  Up and down the roads going, North and South excursions making,	  Up and down the roads going, North and South excursions making,	  Up and down the roads going, North and South excursions making,	  Up and down the roads going, North and South excursions making,
  Power enjoying, elbows stretching, fingers clutching,	  Power enjoying, elbows stretching, fingers clutching,	  Power enjoying, elbows stretching, fingers clutching,	  Power enjoying, elbows stretching, fingers clutching,
  Arm'd and fearless, eating, drinking, sleeping, loving.	  Arm'd and fearless, eating, drinking, sleeping, loving.	  Arm'd and fearless, eating, drinking, sleeping, loving.	  Arm'd and fearless, eating, drinking, sleeping, loving.
  No law less than ourselves owning, sailing, soldiering, thieving,	  No law less than ourselves owning, sailing, soldiering, thieving,	  No law less than ourselves owning, sailing, soldiering, thieving,	  No law less than ourselves owning, sailing, soldiering, thieving,
      threatening,	      threatening,	      threatening,	      threatening,
  Misers, menials, priests alarming, air breathing, water drinking, on	  Misers, menials, priests alarming, air breathing, water drinking, on	  Misers, menials, priests alarming, air breathing, water drinking, on	  Misers, menials, priests alarming, air breathing, water drinking, on
      the turf or the sea-beach dancing,	      the turf or the sea-beach dancing,	      the turf or the sea-beach dancing,	      the turf or the sea-beach dancing,
  Cities wrenching, ease scorning, statutes mocking, feebleness chasing,	  Cities wrenching, ease scorning, statutes mocking, feebleness chasing,	  Cities wrenching, ease scorning, statutes mocking, feebleness chasing,	  Cities wrenching, ease scorning, statutes mocking, feebleness chasing,
  Fulfilling our foray.	  Fulfilling our foray.	  Fulfilling our foray.	  Fulfilling our foray.
			
			
			
			
A Promise to California	A Promise to California	A Promise to California	A Promise to California
			
  A promise to California,	  A promise to California,	  A promise to California,	  A promise to California,
  Or inland to the great pastoral Plains, and on to Puget sound and Oregon;	  Or inland to the great pastoral Plains, and on to Puget sound and Oregon;	  Or inland to the great pastoral Plains, and on to Puget sound and Oregon;	  Or inland to the great pastoral Plains, and on to Puget sound and Oregon;
  Sojourning east a while longer, soon I travel toward you, to remain,	  Sojourning east a while longer, soon I travel toward you, to remain,	  Sojourning east a while longer, soon I travel toward you, to remain,	  Sojourning east a while longer, soon I travel toward you, to remain,
      to teach robust American love,	      to teach robust American love,	      to teach robust American love,	      to teach robust American love,
  For I know very well that I and robust love belong among you,	  For I know very well that I and robust love belong among you,	  For I know very well that I and robust love belong among you,	  For I know very well that I and robust love belong among you,
      inland, and along the Western sea;	      inland, and along the Western sea;	      inland, and along the Western sea;	      inland, and along the Western sea;
  For these States tend inland and toward the Western sea, and I will also.	  For these States tend inland and toward the Western sea, and I will also.	  For these States tend inland and toward the Western sea, and I will also.	  For these States tend inland and toward the Western sea, and I will also.
			
			
			
			
Here the Frailest Leaves of Me	Here the Frailest Leaves of Me	Here the Frailest Leaves of Me	Here the Frailest Leaves of Me
			
  Here the frailest leaves of me and yet my strongest lasting,	  Here the frailest leaves of me and yet my strongest lasting,	  Here the frailest leaves of me and yet my strongest lasting,	  Here the frailest leaves of me and yet my strongest lasting,
  Here I shade and hide my thoughts, I myself do not expose them,	  Here I shade and hide my thoughts, I myself do not expose them,	  Here I shade and hide my thoughts, I myself do not expose them,	  Here I shade and hide my thoughts, I myself do not expose them,
  And yet they expose me more than all my other poems.	  And yet they expose me more than all my other poems.	  And yet they expose me more than all my other poems.	  And yet they expose me more than all my other poems.
			
			
			
			
No Labor-Saving Machine	No Labor-Saving Machine	No Labor-Saving Machine	No Labor-Saving Machine
			
  No labor-saving machine,	  No labor-saving machine,	  No labor-saving machine,	  No labor-saving machine,
  Nor discovery have I made,	  Nor discovery have I made,	  Nor discovery have I made,	  Nor discovery have I made,
  Nor will I be able to leave behind me any wealthy bequest to found	  Nor will I be able to leave behind me any wealthy bequest to found	  Nor will I be able to leave behind me any wealthy bequest to found	  Nor will I be able to leave behind me any wealthy bequest to found
      hospital or library,	      hospital or library,	      hospital or library,	      hospital or library,
  Nor reminiscence of any deed of courage for America,	  Nor reminiscence of any deed of courage for America,	  Nor reminiscence of any deed of courage for America,	  Nor reminiscence of any deed of courage for America,
  Nor literary success nor intellect; nor book for the book-shelf,	  Nor literary success nor intellect; nor book for the book-shelf,	  Nor literary success nor intellect; nor book for the book-shelf,	  Nor literary success nor intellect; nor book for the book-shelf,
  But a few carols vibrating through the air I leave,	  But a few carols vibrating through the air I leave,	  But a few carols vibrating through the air I leave,	  But a few carols vibrating through the air I leave,
  For comrades and lovers.	  For comrades and lovers.	  For comrades and lovers.	  For comrades and lovers.
			
			
			
			
A Glimpse	A Glimpse	A Glimpse	A Glimpse
			
  A glimpse through an interstice caught,	  A glimpse through an interstice caught,	  A glimpse through an interstice caught,	  A glimpse through an interstice caught,
  Of a crowd of workmen and drivers in a bar-room around the stove	  Of a crowd of workmen and drivers in a bar-room around the stove	  Of a crowd of workmen and drivers in a bar-room around the stove	  Of a crowd of workmen and drivers in a bar-room around the stove
      late of a winter night, and I unremark'd seated in a corner,	      late of a winter night, and I unremark'd seated in a corner,	      late of a winter night, and I unremark'd seated in a corner,	      late of a winter night, and I unremark'd seated in a corner,
  Of a youth who loves me and whom I love, silently approaching and	  Of a youth who loves me and whom I love, silently approaching and	  Of a youth who loves me and whom I love, silently approaching and	  Of a youth who loves me and whom I love, silently approaching and
      seating himself near, that he may hold me by the hand,	      seating himself near, that he may hold me by the hand,	      seating himself near, that he may hold me by the hand,	      seating himself near, that he may hold me by the hand,
  A long while amid the noises of coming and going, of drinking and	  A long while amid the noises of coming and going, of drinking and	  A long while amid the noises of coming and going, of drinking and	  A long while amid the noises of coming and going, of drinking and
      oath and smutty jest,	      oath and smutty jest,	      oath and smutty jest,	      oath and smutty jest,
  There we two, content, happy in being together, speaking little,	  There we two, content, happy in being together, speaking little,	  There we two, content, happy in being together, speaking little,	  There we two, content, happy in being together, speaking little,
      perhaps not a word.	      perhaps not a word.	      perhaps not a word.	      perhaps not a word.
			
			
			
			
A Leaf for Hand in Hand	A Leaf for Hand in Hand	A Leaf for Hand in Hand	A Leaf for Hand in Hand
			
  A leaf for hand in hand;	  A leaf for hand in hand;	  A leaf for hand in hand;	  A leaf for hand in hand;
  You natural persons old and young!	  You natural persons old and young!	  You natural persons old and young!	  You natural persons old and young!
  You on the Mississippi and on all the branches and bayous of	  You on the Mississippi and on all the branches and bayous of	  You on the Mississippi and on all the branches and bayous of	  You on the Mississippi and on all the branches and bayous of
      the Mississippi!	      the Mississippi!	      the Mississippi!	      the Mississippi!
  You friendly boatmen and mechanics! you roughs!	  You friendly boatmen and mechanics! you roughs!	  You friendly boatmen and mechanics! you roughs!	  You friendly boatmen and mechanics! you roughs!
  You twain! and all processions moving along the streets!	  You twain! and all processions moving along the streets!	  You twain! and all processions moving along the streets!	  You twain! and all processions moving along the streets!
  I wish to infuse myself among you till I see it common for you to	  I wish to infuse myself among you till I see it common for you to	  I wish to infuse myself among you till I see it common for you to	  I wish to infuse myself among you till I see it common for you to
      walk hand in hand.	      walk hand in hand.	      walk hand in hand.	      walk hand in hand.
			
			
			
			
Earth, My Likeness	Earth, My Likeness	Earth, My Likeness	Earth, My Likeness
			
  Earth, my likeness,	  Earth, my likeness,	  Earth, my likeness,	  Earth, my likeness,
  Though you look so impassive, ample and spheric there,	  Though you look so impassive, ample and spheric there,	  Though you look so impassive, ample and spheric there,	  Though you look so impassive, ample and spheric there,
  I now suspect that is not all;	  I now suspect that is not all;	  I now suspect that is not all;	  I now suspect that is not all;
  I now suspect there is something fierce in you eligible to burst forth,	  I now suspect there is something fierce in you eligible to burst forth,	  I now suspect there is something fierce in you eligible to burst forth,	  I now suspect there is something fierce in you eligible to burst forth,
  For an athlete is enamour'd of me, and I of him,	  For an athlete is enamour'd of me, and I of him,	  For an athlete is enamour'd of me, and I of him,	  For an athlete is enamour'd of me, and I of him,
  But toward him there is something fierce and terrible in me eligible	  But toward him there is something fierce and terrible in me eligible	  But toward him there is something fierce and terrible in me eligible	  But toward him there is something fierce and terrible in me eligible
      to burst forth,	      to burst forth,	      to burst forth,	      to burst forth,
  I dare not tell it in words, not even in these songs.	  I dare not tell it in words, not even in these songs.	  I dare not tell it in words, not even in these songs.	  I dare not tell it in words, not even in these songs.
			
			
			
			
I Dream'd in a Dream	I Dream'd in a Dream	I Dream'd in a Dream	I Dream'd in a Dream
			
  I dream'd in a dream I saw a city invincible to the attacks of the	  I dream'd in a dream I saw a city invincible to the attacks of the	  I dream'd in a dream I saw a city invincible to the attacks of the	  I dream'd in a dream I saw a city invincible to the attacks of the
      whole of the rest of the earth,	      whole of the rest of the earth,	      whole of the rest of the earth,	      whole of the rest of the earth,
  I dream'd that was the new city of Friends,	  I dream'd that was the new city of Friends,	  I dream'd that was the new city of Friends,	  I dream'd that was the new city of Friends,
  Nothing was greater there than the quality of robust love, it led the rest,	  Nothing was greater there than the quality of robust love, it led the rest,	  Nothing was greater there than the quality of robust love, it led the rest,	  Nothing was greater there than the quality of robust love, it led the rest,
  It was seen every hour in the actions of the men of that city,	  It was seen every hour in the actions of the men of that city,	  It was seen every hour in the actions of the men of that city,	  It was seen every hour in the actions of the men of that city,
  And in all their looks and words.	  And in all their looks and words.	  And in all their looks and words.	  And in all their looks and words.
			
			
			
			
What Think You I Take My Pen in Hand?	What Think You I Take My Pen in Hand?	What Think You I Take My Pen in Hand?	What Think You I Take My Pen in Hand?
			
  What think you I take my pen in hand to record?	  What think you I take my pen in hand to record?	  What think you I take my pen in hand to record?	  What think you I take my pen in hand to record?
  The battle-ship, perfect-model'd, majestic, that I saw pass the	  The battle-ship, perfect-model'd, majestic, that I saw pass the	  The battle-ship, perfect-model'd, majestic, that I saw pass the	  The battle-ship, perfect-model'd, majestic, that I saw pass the
      offing to-day under full sail?	      offing to-day under full sail?	      offing to-day under full sail?	      offing to-day under full sail?
  The splendors of the past day? or the splendor of the night that	  The splendors of the past day? or the splendor of the night that	  The splendors of the past day? or the splendor of the night that	  The splendors of the past day? or the splendor of the night that
      envelops me?	      envelops me?	      envelops me?	      envelops me?
  Or the vaunted glory and growth of the great city spread around me? --no;	  Or the vaunted glory and growth of the great city spread around me? --no;	  Or the vaunted glory and growth of the great city spread around me? --no;	  Or the vaunted glory and growth of the great city spread around me? --no;
  But merely of two simple men I saw to-day on the pier in the midst	  But merely of two simple men I saw to-day on the pier in the midst	  But merely of two simple men I saw to-day on the pier in the midst	  But merely of two simple men I saw to-day on the pier in the midst
      of the crowd, parting the parting of dear friends,	      of the crowd, parting the parting of dear friends,	      of the crowd, parting the parting of dear friends,	      of the crowd, parting the parting of dear friends,
  The one to remain hung on the other's neck and passionately kiss'd him,	  The one to remain hung on the other's neck and passionately kiss'd him,	  The one to remain hung on the other's neck and passionately kiss'd him,	  The one to remain hung on the other's neck and passionately kiss'd him,
  While the one to depart tightly prest the one to remain in his arms.	  While the one to depart tightly prest the one to remain in his arms.	  While the one to depart tightly prest the one to remain in his arms.	  While the one to depart tightly prest the one to remain in his arms.
			
			
			
			
To the East and to the West	To the East and to the West	To the East and to the West	To the East and to the West
			
  To the East and to the West,	  To the East and to the West,	  To the East and to the West,	  To the East and to the West,
  To the man of the Seaside State and of Pennsylvania,	  To the man of the Seaside State and of Pennsylvania,	  To the man of the Seaside State and of Pennsylvania,	  To the man of the Seaside State and of Pennsylvania,
  To the Kanadian of the north, to the Southerner I love,	  To the Kanadian of the north, to the Southerner I love,	  To the Kanadian of the north, to the Southerner I love,	  To the Kanadian of the north, to the Southerner I love,
  These with perfect trust to depict you as myself, the germs are in all men,	  These with perfect trust to depict you as myself, the germs are in all men,	  These with perfect trust to depict you as myself, the germs are in all men,	  These with perfect trust to depict you as myself, the germs are in all men,
  I believe the main purport of these States is to found a superb	  I believe the main purport of these States is to found a superb	  I believe the main purport of these States is to found a superb	  I believe the main purport of these States is to found a superb
      friendship, exalte, previously unknown,	      friendship, exalte, previously unknown,	      friendship, exalte, previously unknown,	      friendship, exalte, previously unknown,
  Because I perceive it waits, and has been always waiting, latent in all men.	  Because I perceive it waits, and has been always waiting, latent in all men.	  Because I perceive it waits, and has been always waiting, latent in all men.	  Because I perceive it waits, and has been always waiting, latent in all men.
			
			
			
			
Sometimes with One I Love	Sometimes with One I Love	Sometimes with One I Love	Sometimes with One I Love
			
  Sometimes with one I love I fill myself with rage for fear I effuse	  Sometimes with one I love I fill myself with rage for fear I effuse	  Sometimes with one I love I fill myself with rage for fear I effuse	  Sometimes with one I love I fill myself with rage for fear I effuse
      unreturn'd love,	      unreturn'd love,	      unreturn'd love,	      unreturn'd love,
  But now I think there is no unreturn'd love, the pay is certain one	  But now I think there is no unreturn'd love, the pay is certain one	  But now I think there is no unreturn'd love, the pay is certain one	  But now I think there is no unreturn'd love, the pay is certain one
      way or another,	      way or another,	      way or another,	      way or another,
  (I loved a certain person ardently and my love was not return'd,	  (I loved a certain person ardently and my love was not return'd,	  (I loved a certain person ardently and my love was not return'd,	  (I loved a certain person ardently and my love was not return'd,
  Yet out of that I have written these songs.)	  Yet out of that I have written these songs.)	  Yet out of that I have written these songs.)	  Yet out of that I have written these songs.)
			
			
			
			
To a Western Boy	To a Western Boy	To a Western Boy	To a Western Boy
			
  Many things to absorb I teach to help you become eleve of mine;	  Many things to absorb I teach to help you become eleve of mine;	  Many things to absorb I teach to help you become eleve of mine;	  Many things to absorb I teach to help you become eleve of mine;
  Yet if blood like mine circle not in your veins,	  Yet if blood like mine circle not in your veins,	  Yet if blood like mine circle not in your veins,	  Yet if blood like mine circle not in your veins,
  If you be not silently selected by lovers and do not silently select lovers,	  If you be not silently selected by lovers and do not silently select lovers,	  If you be not silently selected by lovers and do not silently select lovers,	  If you be not silently selected by lovers and do not silently select lovers,
  Of what use is it that you seek to become eleve of mine?	  Of what use is it that you seek to become eleve of mine?	  Of what use is it that you seek to become eleve of mine?	  Of what use is it that you seek to become eleve of mine?
			
			
			
			
Fast Anchor'd Eternal O Love!	Fast Anchor'd Eternal O Love!	Fast Anchor'd Eternal O Love!	Fast Anchor'd Eternal O Love!
			
  Fast-anchor'd eternal O love! O woman I love!	  Fast-anchor'd eternal O love! O woman I love!	  Fast-anchor'd eternal O love! O woman I love!	  Fast-anchor'd eternal O love! O woman I love!
  O bride! O wife! more resistless than I can tell, the thought of you!	  O bride! O wife! more resistless than I can tell, the thought of you!	  O bride! O wife! more resistless than I can tell, the thought of you!	  O bride! O wife! more resistless than I can tell, the thought of you!
  Then separate, as disembodied or another born,	  Then separate, as disembodied or another born,	  Then separate, as disembodied or another born,	  Then separate, as disembodied or another born,
  Ethereal, the last athletic reality, my consolation,	  Ethereal, the last athletic reality, my consolation,	  Ethereal, the last athletic reality, my consolation,	  Ethereal, the last athletic reality, my consolation,
  I ascend, I float in the regions of your love O man,	  I ascend, I float in the regions of your love O man,	  I ascend, I float in the regions of your love O man,	  I ascend, I float in the regions of your love O man,
  O sharer of my roving life.	  O sharer of my roving life.	  O sharer of my roving life.	  O sharer of my roving life.
			
			
			
			
Among the Multitude	Among the Multitude	Among the Multitude	Among the Multitude
			
  Among the men and women the multitude,	  Among the men and women the multitude,	  Among the men and women the multitude,	  Among the men and women the multitude,
  I perceive one picking me out by secret and divine signs,	  I perceive one picking me out by secret and divine signs,	  I perceive one picking me out by secret and divine signs,	  I perceive one picking me out by secret and divine signs,
  Acknowledging none else, not parent, wife, husband, brother, child,	  Acknowledging none else, not parent, wife, husband, brother, child,	  Acknowledging none else, not parent, wife, husband, brother, child,	  Acknowledging none else, not parent, wife, husband, brother, child,
      any nearer than I am,	      any nearer than I am,	      any nearer than I am,	      any nearer than I am,
  Some are baffled, but that one is not--that one knows me.	  Some are baffled, but that one is not--that one knows me.	  Some are baffled, but that one is not--that one knows me.	  Some are baffled, but that one is not--that one knows me.
			
  Ah lover and perfect equal,	  Ah lover and perfect equal,	  Ah lover and perfect equal,	  Ah lover and perfect equal,
  I meant that you should discover me so by faint indirections,	  I meant that you should discover me so by faint indirections,	  I meant that you should discover me so by faint indirections,	  I meant that you should discover me so by faint indirections,
  And I when I meet you mean to discover you by the like in you.	  And I when I meet you mean to discover you by the like in you.	  And I when I meet you mean to discover you by the like in you.	  And I when I meet you mean to discover you by the like in you.
			
			
			
			
O You Whom I Often and Silently Come	O You Whom I Often and Silently Come	O You Whom I Often and Silently Come	O You Whom I Often and Silently Come
			
  O you whom I often and silently come where you are that I may be with you,	  O you whom I often and silently come where you are that I may be with you,	  O you whom I often and silently come where you are that I may be with you,	  O you whom I often and silently come where you are that I may be with you,
  As I walk by your side or sit near, or remain in the same room with you,	  As I walk by your side or sit near, or remain in the same room with you,	  As I walk by your side or sit near, or remain in the same room with you,	  As I walk by your side or sit near, or remain in the same room with you,
  Little you know the subtle electric fire that for your sake is	  Little you know the subtle electric fire that for your sake is	  Little you know the subtle electric fire that for your sake is	  Little you know the subtle electric fire that for your sake is
      playing within me.	      playing within me.	      playing within me.	      playing within me.
			
			
			
			
That Shadow My Likeness	That Shadow My Likeness	That Shadow My Likeness	That Shadow My Likeness
			
  That shadow my likeness that goes to and fro seeking a livelihood,	  That shadow my likeness that goes to and fro seeking a livelihood,	  That shadow my likeness that goes to and fro seeking a livelihood,	  That shadow my likeness that goes to and fro seeking a livelihood,
      chattering, chaffering,	      chattering, chaffering,	      chattering, chaffering,	      chattering, chaffering,
  How often I find myself standing and looking at it where it flits,	  How often I find myself standing and looking at it where it flits,	  How often I find myself standing and looking at it where it flits,	  How often I find myself standing and looking at it where it flits,
  How often I question and doubt whether that is really me;	  How often I question and doubt whether that is really me;	  How often I question and doubt whether that is really me;	  How often I question and doubt whether that is really me;
  But among my lovers and caroling these songs,	  But among my lovers and caroling these songs,	  But among my lovers and caroling these songs,	  But among my lovers and caroling these songs,
  O I never doubt whether that is really me.	  O I never doubt whether that is really me.	  O I never doubt whether that is really me.	  O I never doubt whether that is really me.
			
			
			
			
Full of Life Now	Full of Life Now	Full of Life Now	Full of Life Now
			
  Full of life now, compact, visible,	  Full of life now, compact, visible,	  Full of life now, compact, visible,	  Full of life now, compact, visible,
  I, forty years old the eighty-third year of the States,	  I, forty years old the eighty-third year of the States,	  I, forty years old the eighty-third year of the States,	  I, forty years old the eighty-third year of the States,
  To one a century hence or any number of centuries hence,	  To one a century hence or any number of centuries hence,	  To one a century hence or any number of centuries hence,	  To one a century hence or any number of centuries hence,
  To you yet unborn these, seeking you.	  To you yet unborn these, seeking you.	  To you yet unborn these, seeking you.	  To you yet unborn these, seeking you.
			
  When you read these I that was visible am become invisible,	  When you read these I that was visible am become invisible,	  When you read these I that was visible am become invisible,	  When you read these I that was visible am become invisible,
  Now it is you, compact, visible, realizing my poems, seeking me,	  Now it is you, compact, visible, realizing my poems, seeking me,	  Now it is you, compact, visible, realizing my poems, seeking me,	  Now it is you, compact, visible, realizing my poems, seeking me,
  Fancying how happy you were if I could be with you and become your comrade;	  Fancying how happy you were if I could be with you and become your comrade;	  Fancying how happy you were if I could be with you and become your comrade;	  Fancying how happy you were if I could be with you and become your comrade;
  Be it as if I were with you. (Be not too certain but I am now with you.)	  Be it as if I were with you. (Be not too certain but I am now with you.)	  Be it as if I were with you. (Be not too certain but I am now with you.)	  Be it as if I were with you. (Be not too certain but I am now with you.)
			
			
			
			
BOOK VI	BOOK VI	BOOK VI	BOOK VI
			
			
Salut au Monde!	Salut au Monde!	Salut au Monde!	Salut au Monde!
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  O take my hand Walt Whitman!	  O take my hand Walt Whitman!	  O take my hand Walt Whitman!	  O take my hand Walt Whitman!
  Such gliding wonders! such sights and sounds!	  Such gliding wonders! such sights and sounds!	  Such gliding wonders! such sights and sounds!	  Such gliding wonders! such sights and sounds!
  Such join'd unended links, each hook'd to the next,	  Such join'd unended links, each hook'd to the next,	  Such join'd unended links, each hook'd to the next,	  Such join'd unended links, each hook'd to the next,
  Each answering all, each sharing the earth with all.	  Each answering all, each sharing the earth with all.	  Each answering all, each sharing the earth with all.	  Each answering all, each sharing the earth with all.
			
  What widens within you Walt Whitman?	  What widens within you Walt Whitman?	  What widens within you Walt Whitman?	  What widens within you Walt Whitman?
  What waves and soils exuding?	  What waves and soils exuding?	  What waves and soils exuding?	  What waves and soils exuding?
  What climes? what persons and cities are here?	  What climes? what persons and cities are here?	  What climes? what persons and cities are here?	  What climes? what persons and cities are here?
  Who are the infants, some playing, some slumbering?	  Who are the infants, some playing, some slumbering?	  Who are the infants, some playing, some slumbering?	  Who are the infants, some playing, some slumbering?
  Who are the girls? who are the married women?	  Who are the girls? who are the married women?	  Who are the girls? who are the married women?	  Who are the girls? who are the married women?
  Who are the groups of old men going slowly with their arms about	  Who are the groups of old men going slowly with their arms about	  Who are the groups of old men going slowly with their arms about	  Who are the groups of old men going slowly with their arms about
      each other's necks?	      each other's necks?	      each other's necks?	      each other's necks?
  What rivers are these? what forests and fruits are these?	  What rivers are these? what forests and fruits are these?	  What rivers are these? what forests and fruits are these?	  What rivers are these? what forests and fruits are these?
  What are the mountains call'd that rise so high in the mists?	  What are the mountains call'd that rise so high in the mists?	  What are the mountains call'd that rise so high in the mists?	  What are the mountains call'd that rise so high in the mists?
  What myriads of dwellings are they fill'd with dwellers?	  What myriads of dwellings are they fill'd with dwellers?	  What myriads of dwellings are they fill'd with dwellers?	  What myriads of dwellings are they fill'd with dwellers?
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Within me latitude widens, longitude lengthens,	  Within me latitude widens, longitude lengthens,	  Within me latitude widens, longitude lengthens,	  Within me latitude widens, longitude lengthens,
  Asia, Africa, Europe, are to the east--America is provided for in the west,	  Asia, Africa, Europe, are to the east--America is provided for in the west,	  Asia, Africa, Europe, are to the east--America is provided for in the west,	  Asia, Africa, Europe, are to the east--America is provided for in the west,
  Banding the bulge of the earth winds the hot equator,	  Banding the bulge of the earth winds the hot equator,	  Banding the bulge of the earth winds the hot equator,	  Banding the bulge of the earth winds the hot equator,
  Curiously north and south turn the axis-ends,	  Curiously north and south turn the axis-ends,	  Curiously north and south turn the axis-ends,	  Curiously north and south turn the axis-ends,
  Within me is the longest day, the sun wheels in slanting rings, it	  Within me is the longest day, the sun wheels in slanting rings, it	  Within me is the longest day, the sun wheels in slanting rings, it	  Within me is the longest day, the sun wheels in slanting rings, it
      does not set for months,	      does not set for months,	      does not set for months,	      does not set for months,
  Stretch'd in due time within me the midnight sun just rises above	  Stretch'd in due time within me the midnight sun just rises above	  Stretch'd in due time within me the midnight sun just rises above	  Stretch'd in due time within me the midnight sun just rises above
      the horizon and sinks again,	      the horizon and sinks again,	      the horizon and sinks again,	      the horizon and sinks again,
  Within me zones, seas, cataracts, forests, volcanoes, groups,	  Within me zones, seas, cataracts, forests, volcanoes, groups,	  Within me zones, seas, cataracts, forests, volcanoes, groups,	  Within me zones, seas, cataracts, forests, volcanoes, groups,
  Malaysia, Polynesia, and the great West Indian islands.	  Malaysia, Polynesia, and the great West Indian islands.	  Malaysia, Polynesia, and the great West Indian islands.	  Malaysia, Polynesia, and the great West Indian islands.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  What do you hear Walt Whitman?	  What do you hear Walt Whitman?	  What do you hear Walt Whitman?	  What do you hear Walt Whitman?
			
  I hear the workman singing and the farmer's wife singing,	  I hear the workman singing and the farmer's wife singing,	  I hear the workman singing and the farmer's wife singing,	  I hear the workman singing and the farmer's wife singing,
  I hear in the distance the sounds of children and of animals early	  I hear in the distance the sounds of children and of animals early	  I hear in the distance the sounds of children and of animals early	  I hear in the distance the sounds of children and of animals early
      in the day,	      in the day,	      in the day,	      in the day,
  I hear emulous shouts of Australians pursuing the wild horse,	  I hear emulous shouts of Australians pursuing the wild horse,	  I hear emulous shouts of Australians pursuing the wild horse,	  I hear emulous shouts of Australians pursuing the wild horse,
  I hear the Spanish dance with castanets in the chestnut shade, to	  I hear the Spanish dance with castanets in the chestnut shade, to	  I hear the Spanish dance with castanets in the chestnut shade, to	  I hear the Spanish dance with castanets in the chestnut shade, to
      the rebeck and guitar,	      the rebeck and guitar,	      the rebeck and guitar,	      the rebeck and guitar,
  I hear continual echoes from the Thames,	  I hear continual echoes from the Thames,	  I hear continual echoes from the Thames,	  I hear continual echoes from the Thames,
  I hear fierce French liberty songs,	  I hear fierce French liberty songs,	  I hear fierce French liberty songs,	  I hear fierce French liberty songs,
  I hear of the Italian boat-sculler the musical recitative of old poems,	  I hear of the Italian boat-sculler the musical recitative of old poems,	  I hear of the Italian boat-sculler the musical recitative of old poems,	  I hear of the Italian boat-sculler the musical recitative of old poems,
  I hear the locusts in Syria as they strike the grain and grass with	  I hear the locusts in Syria as they strike the grain and grass with	  I hear the locusts in Syria as they strike the grain and grass with	  I hear the locusts in Syria as they strike the grain and grass with
      the showers of their terrible clouds,	      the showers of their terrible clouds,	      the showers of their terrible clouds,	      the showers of their terrible clouds,
  I hear the Coptic refrain toward sundown, pensively falling on the	  I hear the Coptic refrain toward sundown, pensively falling on the	  I hear the Coptic refrain toward sundown, pensively falling on the	  I hear the Coptic refrain toward sundown, pensively falling on the
      breast of the black venerable vast mother the Nile,	      breast of the black venerable vast mother the Nile,	      breast of the black venerable vast mother the Nile,	      breast of the black venerable vast mother the Nile,
  I hear the chirp of the Mexican muleteer, and the bells of the mule,	  I hear the chirp of the Mexican muleteer, and the bells of the mule,	  I hear the chirp of the Mexican muleteer, and the bells of the mule,	  I hear the chirp of the Mexican muleteer, and the bells of the mule,
  I hear the Arab muezzin calling from the top of the mosque,	  I hear the Arab muezzin calling from the top of the mosque,	  I hear the Arab muezzin calling from the top of the mosque,	  I hear the Arab muezzin calling from the top of the mosque,
  I hear the Christian priests at the altars of their churches, I hear	  I hear the Christian priests at the altars of their churches, I hear	  I hear the Christian priests at the altars of their churches, I hear	  I hear the Christian priests at the altars of their churches, I hear
      the responsive base and soprano,	      the responsive base and soprano,	      the responsive base and soprano,	      the responsive base and soprano,
  I hear the cry of the Cossack, and the sailor's voice putting to sea	  I hear the cry of the Cossack, and the sailor's voice putting to sea	  I hear the cry of the Cossack, and the sailor's voice putting to sea	  I hear the cry of the Cossack, and the sailor's voice putting to sea
      at Okotsk,	      at Okotsk,	      at Okotsk,	      at Okotsk,
  I hear the wheeze of the slave-coffle as the slaves march on, as the	  I hear the wheeze of the slave-coffle as the slaves march on, as the	  I hear the wheeze of the slave-coffle as the slaves march on, as the	  I hear the wheeze of the slave-coffle as the slaves march on, as the
      husky gangs pass on by twos and threes, fasten'd together	      husky gangs pass on by twos and threes, fasten'd together	      husky gangs pass on by twos and threes, fasten'd together	      husky gangs pass on by twos and threes, fasten'd together
      with wrist-chains and ankle-chains,	      with wrist-chains and ankle-chains,	      with wrist-chains and ankle-chains,	      with wrist-chains and ankle-chains,
  I hear the Hebrew reading his records and psalms,	  I hear the Hebrew reading his records and psalms,	  I hear the Hebrew reading his records and psalms,	  I hear the Hebrew reading his records and psalms,
  I hear the rhythmic myths of the Greeks, and the strong legends of	  I hear the rhythmic myths of the Greeks, and the strong legends of	  I hear the rhythmic myths of the Greeks, and the strong legends of	  I hear the rhythmic myths of the Greeks, and the strong legends of
      the Romans,	      the Romans,	      the Romans,	      the Romans,
  I hear the tale of the divine life and bloody death of the beautiful	  I hear the tale of the divine life and bloody death of the beautiful	  I hear the tale of the divine life and bloody death of the beautiful	  I hear the tale of the divine life and bloody death of the beautiful
      God the Christ,	      God the Christ,	      God the Christ,	      God the Christ,
  I hear the Hindoo teaching his favorite pupil the loves, wars,	  I hear the Hindoo teaching his favorite pupil the loves, wars,	  I hear the Hindoo teaching his favorite pupil the loves, wars,	  I hear the Hindoo teaching his favorite pupil the loves, wars,
      adages, transmitted safely to this day from poets who wrote three	      adages, transmitted safely to this day from poets who wrote three	      adages, transmitted safely to this day from poets who wrote three	      adages, transmitted safely to this day from poets who wrote three
      thousand years ago.	      thousand years ago.	      thousand years ago.	      thousand years ago.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  What do you see Walt Whitman?	  What do you see Walt Whitman?	  What do you see Walt Whitman?	  What do you see Walt Whitman?
  Who are they you salute, and that one after another salute you?	  Who are they you salute, and that one after another salute you?	  Who are they you salute, and that one after another salute you?	  Who are they you salute, and that one after another salute you?
  I see a great round wonder rolling through space,	  I see a great round wonder rolling through space,	  I see a great round wonder rolling through space,	  I see a great round wonder rolling through space,
  I see diminute farms, hamlets, ruins, graveyards, jails, factories,	  I see diminute farms, hamlets, ruins, graveyards, jails, factories,	  I see diminute farms, hamlets, ruins, graveyards, jails, factories,	  I see diminute farms, hamlets, ruins, graveyards, jails, factories,
      palaces, hovels, huts of barbarians, tents of nomads upon the surface,	      palaces, hovels, huts of barbarians, tents of nomads upon the surface,	      palaces, hovels, huts of barbarians, tents of nomads upon the surface,	      palaces, hovels, huts of barbarians, tents of nomads upon the surface,
  I see the shaded part on one side where the sleepers are sleeping,	  I see the shaded part on one side where the sleepers are sleeping,	  I see the shaded part on one side where the sleepers are sleeping,	  I see the shaded part on one side where the sleepers are sleeping,
      and the sunlit part on the other side,	      and the sunlit part on the other side,	      and the sunlit part on the other side,	      and the sunlit part on the other side,
  I see the curious rapid change of the light and shade,	  I see the curious rapid change of the light and shade,	  I see the curious rapid change of the light and shade,	  I see the curious rapid change of the light and shade,
  I see distant lands, as real and near to the inhabitants of them as	  I see distant lands, as real and near to the inhabitants of them as	  I see distant lands, as real and near to the inhabitants of them as	  I see distant lands, as real and near to the inhabitants of them as
      my land is to me.	      my land is to me.	      my land is to me.	      my land is to me.
			
  I see plenteous waters,	  I see plenteous waters,	  I see plenteous waters,	  I see plenteous waters,
  I see mountain peaks, I see the sierras of Andes where they range,	  I see mountain peaks, I see the sierras of Andes where they range,	  I see mountain peaks, I see the sierras of Andes where they range,	  I see mountain peaks, I see the sierras of Andes where they range,
  I see plainly the Himalayas, Chian Shahs, Altays, Ghauts,	  I see plainly the Himalayas, Chian Shahs, Altays, Ghauts,	  I see plainly the Himalayas, Chian Shahs, Altays, Ghauts,	  I see plainly the Himalayas, Chian Shahs, Altays, Ghauts,
  I see the giant pinnacles of Elbruz, Kazbek, Bazardjusi,	  I see the giant pinnacles of Elbruz, Kazbek, Bazardjusi,	  I see the giant pinnacles of Elbruz, Kazbek, Bazardjusi,	  I see the giant pinnacles of Elbruz, Kazbek, Bazardjusi,
  I see the Styrian Alps, and the Karnac Alps,	  I see the Styrian Alps, and the Karnac Alps,	  I see the Styrian Alps, and the Karnac Alps,	  I see the Styrian Alps, and the Karnac Alps,
  I see the Pyrenees, Balks, Carpathians, and to the north the	  I see the Pyrenees, Balks, Carpathians, and to the north the	  I see the Pyrenees, Balks, Carpathians, and to the north the	  I see the Pyrenees, Balks, Carpathians, and to the north the
      Dofrafields, and off at sea mount Hecla,	      Dofrafields, and off at sea mount Hecla,	      Dofrafields, and off at sea mount Hecla,	      Dofrafields, and off at sea mount Hecla,
  I see Vesuvius and Etna, the mountains of the Moon, and the Red	  I see Vesuvius and Etna, the mountains of the Moon, and the Red	  I see Vesuvius and Etna, the mountains of the Moon, and the Red	  I see Vesuvius and Etna, the mountains of the Moon, and the Red
      mountains of Madagascar,	      mountains of Madagascar,	      mountains of Madagascar,	      mountains of Madagascar,
  I see the Lybian, Arabian, and Asiatic deserts,	  I see the Lybian, Arabian, and Asiatic deserts,	  I see the Lybian, Arabian, and Asiatic deserts,	  I see the Lybian, Arabian, and Asiatic deserts,
  I see huge dreadful Arctic and Antarctic icebergs,	  I see huge dreadful Arctic and Antarctic icebergs,	  I see huge dreadful Arctic and Antarctic icebergs,	  I see huge dreadful Arctic and Antarctic icebergs,
  I see the superior oceans and the inferior ones, the Atlantic and	  I see the superior oceans and the inferior ones, the Atlantic and	  I see the superior oceans and the inferior ones, the Atlantic and	  I see the superior oceans and the inferior ones, the Atlantic and
      Pacific, the sea of Mexico, the Brazilian sea, and the sea of Peru,	      Pacific, the sea of Mexico, the Brazilian sea, and the sea of Peru,	      Pacific, the sea of Mexico, the Brazilian sea, and the sea of Peru,	      Pacific, the sea of Mexico, the Brazilian sea, and the sea of Peru,
  The waters of Hindustan, the China sea, and the gulf of Guinea,	  The waters of Hindustan, the China sea, and the gulf of Guinea,	  The waters of Hindustan, the China sea, and the gulf of Guinea,	  The waters of Hindustan, the China sea, and the gulf of Guinea,
  The Japan waters, the beautiful bay of Nagasaki land-lock'd in its	  The Japan waters, the beautiful bay of Nagasaki land-lock'd in its	  The Japan waters, the beautiful bay of Nagasaki land-lock'd in its	  The Japan waters, the beautiful bay of Nagasaki land-lock'd in its
      mountains,	      mountains,	      mountains,	      mountains,
  The spread of the Baltic, Caspian, Bothnia, the British shores, and	  The spread of the Baltic, Caspian, Bothnia, the British shores, and	  The spread of the Baltic, Caspian, Bothnia, the British shores, and	  The spread of the Baltic, Caspian, Bothnia, the British shores, and
      the bay of Biscay,	      the bay of Biscay,	      the bay of Biscay,	      the bay of Biscay,
  The clear-sunn'd Mediterranean, and from one to another of its islands,	  The clear-sunn'd Mediterranean, and from one to another of its islands,	  The clear-sunn'd Mediterranean, and from one to another of its islands,	  The clear-sunn'd Mediterranean, and from one to another of its islands,
  The White sea, and the sea around Greenland.	  The White sea, and the sea around Greenland.	  The White sea, and the sea around Greenland.	  The White sea, and the sea around Greenland.
			
  I behold the mariners of the world,	  I behold the mariners of the world,	  I behold the mariners of the world,	  I behold the mariners of the world,
  Some are in storms, some in the night with the watch on the lookout,	  Some are in storms, some in the night with the watch on the lookout,	  Some are in storms, some in the night with the watch on the lookout,	  Some are in storms, some in the night with the watch on the lookout,
  Some drifting helplessly, some with contagious diseases.	  Some drifting helplessly, some with contagious diseases.	  Some drifting helplessly, some with contagious diseases.	  Some drifting helplessly, some with contagious diseases.
			
  I behold the sail and steamships of the world, some in clusters in	  I behold the sail and steamships of the world, some in clusters in	  I behold the sail and steamships of the world, some in clusters in	  I behold the sail and steamships of the world, some in clusters in
      port, some on their voyages,	      port, some on their voyages,	      port, some on their voyages,	      port, some on their voyages,
  Some double the cape of Storms, some cape Verde, others capes	  Some double the cape of Storms, some cape Verde, others capes	  Some double the cape of Storms, some cape Verde, others capes	  Some double the cape of Storms, some cape Verde, others capes
      Guardafui, Bon, or Bajadore,	      Guardafui, Bon, or Bajadore,	      Guardafui, Bon, or Bajadore,	      Guardafui, Bon, or Bajadore,
  Others Dondra head, others pass the straits of Sunda, others cape	  Others Dondra head, others pass the straits of Sunda, others cape	  Others Dondra head, others pass the straits of Sunda, others cape	  Others Dondra head, others pass the straits of Sunda, others cape
      Lopatka, others Behring's straits,	      Lopatka, others Behring's straits,	      Lopatka, others Behring's straits,	      Lopatka, others Behring's straits,
  Others cape Horn, others sail the gulf of Mexico or along Cuba or	  Others cape Horn, others sail the gulf of Mexico or along Cuba or	  Others cape Horn, others sail the gulf of Mexico or along Cuba or	  Others cape Horn, others sail the gulf of Mexico or along Cuba or
      Hayti, others Hudson's bay or Baffin's bay,	      Hayti, others Hudson's bay or Baffin's bay,	      Hayti, others Hudson's bay or Baffin's bay,	      Hayti, others Hudson's bay or Baffin's bay,
  Others pass the straits of Dover, others enter the Wash, others the	  Others pass the straits of Dover, others enter the Wash, others the	  Others pass the straits of Dover, others enter the Wash, others the	  Others pass the straits of Dover, others enter the Wash, others the
      firth of Solway, others round cape Clear, others the Land's End,	      firth of Solway, others round cape Clear, others the Land's End,	      firth of Solway, others round cape Clear, others the Land's End,	      firth of Solway, others round cape Clear, others the Land's End,
  Others traverse the Zuyder Zee or the Scheld,	  Others traverse the Zuyder Zee or the Scheld,	  Others traverse the Zuyder Zee or the Scheld,	  Others traverse the Zuyder Zee or the Scheld,
  Others as comers and goers at Gibraltar or the Dardanelles,	  Others as comers and goers at Gibraltar or the Dardanelles,	  Others as comers and goers at Gibraltar or the Dardanelles,	  Others as comers and goers at Gibraltar or the Dardanelles,
  Others sternly push their way through the northern winter-packs,	  Others sternly push their way through the northern winter-packs,	  Others sternly push their way through the northern winter-packs,	  Others sternly push their way through the northern winter-packs,
  Others descend or ascend the Obi or the Lena,	  Others descend or ascend the Obi or the Lena,	  Others descend or ascend the Obi or the Lena,	  Others descend or ascend the Obi or the Lena,
  Others the Niger or the Congo, others the Indus, the Burampooter	  Others the Niger or the Congo, others the Indus, the Burampooter	  Others the Niger or the Congo, others the Indus, the Burampooter	  Others the Niger or the Congo, others the Indus, the Burampooter
      and Cambodia,	      and Cambodia,	      and Cambodia,	      and Cambodia,
  Others wait steam'd up ready to start in the ports of Australia,	  Others wait steam'd up ready to start in the ports of Australia,	  Others wait steam'd up ready to start in the ports of Australia,	  Others wait steam'd up ready to start in the ports of Australia,
  Wait at Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin, Marseilles, Lisbon, Naples,	  Wait at Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin, Marseilles, Lisbon, Naples,	  Wait at Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin, Marseilles, Lisbon, Naples,	  Wait at Liverpool, Glasgow, Dublin, Marseilles, Lisbon, Naples,
  Hamburg, Bremen, Bordeaux, the Hague, Copenhagen,	  Hamburg, Bremen, Bordeaux, the Hague, Copenhagen,	  Hamburg, Bremen, Bordeaux, the Hague, Copenhagen,	  Hamburg, Bremen, Bordeaux, the Hague, Copenhagen,
  Wait at Valparaiso, Rio Janeiro, Panama.	  Wait at Valparaiso, Rio Janeiro, Panama.	  Wait at Valparaiso, Rio Janeiro, Panama.	  Wait at Valparaiso, Rio Janeiro, Panama.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  I see the tracks of the railroads of the earth,	  I see the tracks of the railroads of the earth,	  I see the tracks of the railroads of the earth,	  I see the tracks of the railroads of the earth,
  I see them in Great Britain, I see them in Europe,	  I see them in Great Britain, I see them in Europe,	  I see them in Great Britain, I see them in Europe,	  I see them in Great Britain, I see them in Europe,
  I see them in Asia and in Africa.	  I see them in Asia and in Africa.	  I see them in Asia and in Africa.	  I see them in Asia and in Africa.
			
  I see the electric telegraphs of the earth,	  I see the electric telegraphs of the earth,	  I see the electric telegraphs of the earth,	  I see the electric telegraphs of the earth,
  I see the filaments of the news of the wars, deaths, losses, gains,	  I see the filaments of the news of the wars, deaths, losses, gains,	  I see the filaments of the news of the wars, deaths, losses, gains,	  I see the filaments of the news of the wars, deaths, losses, gains,
      passions, of my race.	      passions, of my race.	      passions, of my race.	      passions, of my race.
			
  I see the long river-stripes of the earth,	  I see the long river-stripes of the earth,	  I see the long river-stripes of the earth,	  I see the long river-stripes of the earth,
  I see the Amazon and the Paraguay,	  I see the Amazon and the Paraguay,	  I see the Amazon and the Paraguay,	  I see the Amazon and the Paraguay,
  I see the four great rivers of China, the Amour, the Yellow River,	  I see the four great rivers of China, the Amour, the Yellow River,	  I see the four great rivers of China, the Amour, the Yellow River,	  I see the four great rivers of China, the Amour, the Yellow River,
      the Yiang-tse, and the Pearl,	      the Yiang-tse, and the Pearl,	      the Yiang-tse, and the Pearl,	      the Yiang-tse, and the Pearl,
  I see where the Seine flows, and where the Danube, the Loire, the	  I see where the Seine flows, and where the Danube, the Loire, the	  I see where the Seine flows, and where the Danube, the Loire, the	  I see where the Seine flows, and where the Danube, the Loire, the
      Rhone, and the Guadalquiver flow,	      Rhone, and the Guadalquiver flow,	      Rhone, and the Guadalquiver flow,	      Rhone, and the Guadalquiver flow,
  I see the windings of the Volga, the Dnieper, the Oder,	  I see the windings of the Volga, the Dnieper, the Oder,	  I see the windings of the Volga, the Dnieper, the Oder,	  I see the windings of the Volga, the Dnieper, the Oder,
  I see the Tuscan going down the Arno, and the Venetian along the Po,	  I see the Tuscan going down the Arno, and the Venetian along the Po,	  I see the Tuscan going down the Arno, and the Venetian along the Po,	  I see the Tuscan going down the Arno, and the Venetian along the Po,
  I see the Greek seaman sailing out of Egina bay.	  I see the Greek seaman sailing out of Egina bay.	  I see the Greek seaman sailing out of Egina bay.	  I see the Greek seaman sailing out of Egina bay.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  I see the site of the old empire of Assyria, and that of Persia, and	  I see the site of the old empire of Assyria, and that of Persia, and	  I see the site of the old empire of Assyria, and that of Persia, and	  I see the site of the old empire of Assyria, and that of Persia, and
      that of India,	      that of India,	      that of India,	      that of India,
  I see the falling of the Ganges over the high rim of Saukara.	  I see the falling of the Ganges over the high rim of Saukara.	  I see the falling of the Ganges over the high rim of Saukara.	  I see the falling of the Ganges over the high rim of Saukara.
			
  I see the place of the idea of the Deity incarnated by avatars in	  I see the place of the idea of the Deity incarnated by avatars in	  I see the place of the idea of the Deity incarnated by avatars in	  I see the place of the idea of the Deity incarnated by avatars in
      human forms,	      human forms,	      human forms,	      human forms,
  I see the spots of the successions of priests on the earth, oracles,	  I see the spots of the successions of priests on the earth, oracles,	  I see the spots of the successions of priests on the earth, oracles,	  I see the spots of the successions of priests on the earth, oracles,
      sacrificers, brahmins, sabians, llamas, monks, muftis, exhorters,	      sacrificers, brahmins, sabians, llamas, monks, muftis, exhorters,	      sacrificers, brahmins, sabians, llamas, monks, muftis, exhorters,	      sacrificers, brahmins, sabians, llamas, monks, muftis, exhorters,
  I see where druids walk'd the groves of Mona, I see the mistletoe	  I see where druids walk'd the groves of Mona, I see the mistletoe	  I see where druids walk'd the groves of Mona, I see the mistletoe	  I see where druids walk'd the groves of Mona, I see the mistletoe
      and vervain,	      and vervain,	      and vervain,	      and vervain,
  I see the temples of the deaths of the bodies of Gods, I see the old	  I see the temples of the deaths of the bodies of Gods, I see the old	  I see the temples of the deaths of the bodies of Gods, I see the old	  I see the temples of the deaths of the bodies of Gods, I see the old
      signifiers.	      signifiers.	      signifiers.	      signifiers.
			
  I see Christ eating the bread of his last supper in the midst of	  I see Christ eating the bread of his last supper in the midst of	  I see Christ eating the bread of his last supper in the midst of	  I see Christ eating the bread of his last supper in the midst of
      youths and old persons,	      youths and old persons,	      youths and old persons,	      youths and old persons,
  I see where the strong divine young man the Hercules toil'd	  I see where the strong divine young man the Hercules toil'd	  I see where the strong divine young man the Hercules toil'd	  I see where the strong divine young man the Hercules toil'd
      faithfully and long and then died,	      faithfully and long and then died,	      faithfully and long and then died,	      faithfully and long and then died,
  I see the place of the innocent rich life and hapless fate of the	  I see the place of the innocent rich life and hapless fate of the	  I see the place of the innocent rich life and hapless fate of the	  I see the place of the innocent rich life and hapless fate of the
      beautiful nocturnal son, the full-limb'd Bacchus,	      beautiful nocturnal son, the full-limb'd Bacchus,	      beautiful nocturnal son, the full-limb'd Bacchus,	      beautiful nocturnal son, the full-limb'd Bacchus,
  I see Kneph, blooming, drest in blue, with the crown of feathers on	  I see Kneph, blooming, drest in blue, with the crown of feathers on	  I see Kneph, blooming, drest in blue, with the crown of feathers on	  I see Kneph, blooming, drest in blue, with the crown of feathers on
      his head,	      his head,	      his head,	      his head,
  I see Hermes, unsuspected, dying, well-belov'd, saying to the people	  I see Hermes, unsuspected, dying, well-belov'd, saying to the people	  I see Hermes, unsuspected, dying, well-belov'd, saying to the people	  I see Hermes, unsuspected, dying, well-belov'd, saying to the people
      Do not weep for me,	      Do not weep for me,	      Do not weep for me,	      Do not weep for me,
  This is not my true country, I have lived banish'd from my true	  This is not my true country, I have lived banish'd from my true	  This is not my true country, I have lived banish'd from my true	  This is not my true country, I have lived banish'd from my true
      country, I now go back there,	      country, I now go back there,	      country, I now go back there,	      country, I now go back there,
  I return to the celestial sphere where every one goes in his turn.	  I return to the celestial sphere where every one goes in his turn.	  I return to the celestial sphere where every one goes in his turn.	  I return to the celestial sphere where every one goes in his turn.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  I see the battle-fields of the earth, grass grows upon them and	  I see the battle-fields of the earth, grass grows upon them and	  I see the battle-fields of the earth, grass grows upon them and	  I see the battle-fields of the earth, grass grows upon them and
      blossoms and corn,	      blossoms and corn,	      blossoms and corn,	      blossoms and corn,
  I see the tracks of ancient and modern expeditions.	  I see the tracks of ancient and modern expeditions.	  I see the tracks of ancient and modern expeditions.	  I see the tracks of ancient and modern expeditions.
			
  I see the nameless masonries, venerable messages of the unknown	  I see the nameless masonries, venerable messages of the unknown	  I see the nameless masonries, venerable messages of the unknown	  I see the nameless masonries, venerable messages of the unknown
      events, heroes, records of the earth.	      events, heroes, records of the earth.	      events, heroes, records of the earth.	      events, heroes, records of the earth.
			
  I see the places of the sagas,	  I see the places of the sagas,	  I see the places of the sagas,	  I see the places of the sagas,
  I see pine-trees and fir-trees torn by northern blasts,	  I see pine-trees and fir-trees torn by northern blasts,	  I see pine-trees and fir-trees torn by northern blasts,	  I see pine-trees and fir-trees torn by northern blasts,
  I see granite bowlders and cliffs, I see green meadows and lakes,	  I see granite bowlders and cliffs, I see green meadows and lakes,	  I see granite bowlders and cliffs, I see green meadows and lakes,	  I see granite bowlders and cliffs, I see green meadows and lakes,
  I see the burial-cairns of Scandinavian warriors,	  I see the burial-cairns of Scandinavian warriors,	  I see the burial-cairns of Scandinavian warriors,	  I see the burial-cairns of Scandinavian warriors,
  I see them raised high with stones by the marge of restless oceans,	  I see them raised high with stones by the marge of restless oceans,	  I see them raised high with stones by the marge of restless oceans,	  I see them raised high with stones by the marge of restless oceans,
      that the dead men's spirits when they wearied of their quiet	      that the dead men's spirits when they wearied of their quiet	      that the dead men's spirits when they wearied of their quiet	      that the dead men's spirits when they wearied of their quiet
      graves might rise up through the mounds and gaze on the tossing	      graves might rise up through the mounds and gaze on the tossing	      graves might rise up through the mounds and gaze on the tossing	      graves might rise up through the mounds and gaze on the tossing
      billows, and be refresh'd by storms, immensity, liberty, action.	      billows, and be refresh'd by storms, immensity, liberty, action.	      billows, and be refresh'd by storms, immensity, liberty, action.	      billows, and be refresh'd by storms, immensity, liberty, action.
			
  I see the steppes of Asia,	  I see the steppes of Asia,	  I see the steppes of Asia,	  I see the steppes of Asia,
  I see the tumuli of Mongolia, I see the tents of Kalmucks and Baskirs,	  I see the tumuli of Mongolia, I see the tents of Kalmucks and Baskirs,	  I see the tumuli of Mongolia, I see the tents of Kalmucks and Baskirs,	  I see the tumuli of Mongolia, I see the tents of Kalmucks and Baskirs,
  I see the nomadic tribes with herds of oxen and cows,	  I see the nomadic tribes with herds of oxen and cows,	  I see the nomadic tribes with herds of oxen and cows,	  I see the nomadic tribes with herds of oxen and cows,
  I see the table-lands notch'd with ravines, I see the jungles and deserts,	  I see the table-lands notch'd with ravines, I see the jungles and deserts,	  I see the table-lands notch'd with ravines, I see the jungles and deserts,	  I see the table-lands notch'd with ravines, I see the jungles and deserts,
  I see the camel, the wild steed, the bustard, the fat-tail'd sheep,	  I see the camel, the wild steed, the bustard, the fat-tail'd sheep,	  I see the camel, the wild steed, the bustard, the fat-tail'd sheep,	  I see the camel, the wild steed, the bustard, the fat-tail'd sheep,
      the antelope, and the burrowing wolf	      the antelope, and the burrowing wolf	      the antelope, and the burrowing wolf	      the antelope, and the burrowing wolf
			
  I see the highlands of Abyssinia,	  I see the highlands of Abyssinia,	  I see the highlands of Abyssinia,	  I see the highlands of Abyssinia,
  I see flocks of goats feeding, and see the fig-tree, tamarind, date,	  I see flocks of goats feeding, and see the fig-tree, tamarind, date,	  I see flocks of goats feeding, and see the fig-tree, tamarind, date,	  I see flocks of goats feeding, and see the fig-tree, tamarind, date,
  And see fields of teff-wheat and places of verdure and gold.	  And see fields of teff-wheat and places of verdure and gold.	  And see fields of teff-wheat and places of verdure and gold.	  And see fields of teff-wheat and places of verdure and gold.
			
  I see the Brazilian vaquero,	  I see the Brazilian vaquero,	  I see the Brazilian vaquero,	  I see the Brazilian vaquero,
  I see the Bolivian ascending mount Sorata,	  I see the Bolivian ascending mount Sorata,	  I see the Bolivian ascending mount Sorata,	  I see the Bolivian ascending mount Sorata,
  I see the Wacho crossing the plains, I see the incomparable rider of	  I see the Wacho crossing the plains, I see the incomparable rider of	  I see the Wacho crossing the plains, I see the incomparable rider of	  I see the Wacho crossing the plains, I see the incomparable rider of
      horses with his lasso on his arm,	      horses with his lasso on his arm,	      horses with his lasso on his arm,	      horses with his lasso on his arm,
  I see over the pampas the pursuit of wild cattle for their hides.	  I see over the pampas the pursuit of wild cattle for their hides.	  I see over the pampas the pursuit of wild cattle for their hides.	  I see over the pampas the pursuit of wild cattle for their hides.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  I see the regions of snow and ice,	  I see the regions of snow and ice,	  I see the regions of snow and ice,	  I see the regions of snow and ice,
  I see the sharp-eyed Samoiede and the Finn,	  I see the sharp-eyed Samoiede and the Finn,	  I see the sharp-eyed Samoiede and the Finn,	  I see the sharp-eyed Samoiede and the Finn,
  I see the seal-seeker in his boat poising his lance,	  I see the seal-seeker in his boat poising his lance,	  I see the seal-seeker in his boat poising his lance,	  I see the seal-seeker in his boat poising his lance,
  I see the Siberian on his slight-built sledge drawn by dogs,	  I see the Siberian on his slight-built sledge drawn by dogs,	  I see the Siberian on his slight-built sledge drawn by dogs,	  I see the Siberian on his slight-built sledge drawn by dogs,
  I see the porpoise-hunters, I see the whale-crews of the south	  I see the porpoise-hunters, I see the whale-crews of the south	  I see the porpoise-hunters, I see the whale-crews of the south	  I see the porpoise-hunters, I see the whale-crews of the south
      Pacific and the north Atlantic,	      Pacific and the north Atlantic,	      Pacific and the north Atlantic,	      Pacific and the north Atlantic,
  I see the cliffs, glaciers, torrents, valleys, of Switzerland--I	  I see the cliffs, glaciers, torrents, valleys, of Switzerland--I	  I see the cliffs, glaciers, torrents, valleys, of Switzerland--I	  I see the cliffs, glaciers, torrents, valleys, of Switzerland--I
      mark the long winters and the isolation.	      mark the long winters and the isolation.	      mark the long winters and the isolation.	      mark the long winters and the isolation.
			
  I see the cities of the earth and make myself at random a part of them,	  I see the cities of the earth and make myself at random a part of them,	  I see the cities of the earth and make myself at random a part of them,	  I see the cities of the earth and make myself at random a part of them,
  I am a real Parisian,	  I am a real Parisian,	  I am a real Parisian,	  I am a real Parisian,
  I am a habitan of Vienna, St. Petersburg, Berlin, Constantinople,	  I am a habitan of Vienna, St. Petersburg, Berlin, Constantinople,	  I am a habitan of Vienna, St. Petersburg, Berlin, Constantinople,	  I am a habitan of Vienna, St. Petersburg, Berlin, Constantinople,
  I am of Adelaide, Sidney, Melbourne,	  I am of Adelaide, Sidney, Melbourne,	  I am of Adelaide, Sidney, Melbourne,	  I am of Adelaide, Sidney, Melbourne,
  I am of London, Manchester, Bristol, Edinburgh, Limerick,	  I am of London, Manchester, Bristol, Edinburgh, Limerick,	  I am of London, Manchester, Bristol, Edinburgh, Limerick,	  I am of London, Manchester, Bristol, Edinburgh, Limerick,
  I am of Madrid, Cadiz, Barcelona, Oporto, Lyons, Brussels, Berne,	  I am of Madrid, Cadiz, Barcelona, Oporto, Lyons, Brussels, Berne,	  I am of Madrid, Cadiz, Barcelona, Oporto, Lyons, Brussels, Berne,	  I am of Madrid, Cadiz, Barcelona, Oporto, Lyons, Brussels, Berne,
      Frankfort, Stuttgart, Turin, Florence,	      Frankfort, Stuttgart, Turin, Florence,	      Frankfort, Stuttgart, Turin, Florence,	      Frankfort, Stuttgart, Turin, Florence,
  I belong in Moscow, Cracow, Warsaw, or northward in Christiania or	  I belong in Moscow, Cracow, Warsaw, or northward in Christiania or	  I belong in Moscow, Cracow, Warsaw, or northward in Christiania or	  I belong in Moscow, Cracow, Warsaw, or northward in Christiania or
      Stockholm, or in Siberian Irkutsk, or in some street in Iceland,	      Stockholm, or in Siberian Irkutsk, or in some street in Iceland,	      Stockholm, or in Siberian Irkutsk, or in some street in Iceland,	      Stockholm, or in Siberian Irkutsk, or in some street in Iceland,
  I descend upon all those cities, and rise from them again.	  I descend upon all those cities, and rise from them again.	  I descend upon all those cities, and rise from them again.	  I descend upon all those cities, and rise from them again.
			
       10	       10	       10	       10
  I see vapors exhaling from unexplored countries,	  I see vapors exhaling from unexplored countries,	  I see vapors exhaling from unexplored countries,	  I see vapors exhaling from unexplored countries,
  I see the savage types, the bow and arrow, the poison'd splint, the	  I see the savage types, the bow and arrow, the poison'd splint, the	  I see the savage types, the bow and arrow, the poison'd splint, the	  I see the savage types, the bow and arrow, the poison'd splint, the
      fetich, and the obi.	      fetich, and the obi.	      fetich, and the obi.	      fetich, and the obi.
  I see African and Asiatic towns,	  I see African and Asiatic towns,	  I see African and Asiatic towns,	  I see African and Asiatic towns,
  I see Algiers, Tripoli, Derne, Mogadore, Timbuctoo, Monrovia,	  I see Algiers, Tripoli, Derne, Mogadore, Timbuctoo, Monrovia,	  I see Algiers, Tripoli, Derne, Mogadore, Timbuctoo, Monrovia,	  I see Algiers, Tripoli, Derne, Mogadore, Timbuctoo, Monrovia,
  I see the swarms of Pekin, Canton, Benares, Delhi, Calcutta, Tokio,	  I see the swarms of Pekin, Canton, Benares, Delhi, Calcutta, Tokio,	  I see the swarms of Pekin, Canton, Benares, Delhi, Calcutta, Tokio,	  I see the swarms of Pekin, Canton, Benares, Delhi, Calcutta, Tokio,
  I see the Kruman in his hut, and the Dahoman and Ashantee-man in their huts,	  I see the Kruman in his hut, and the Dahoman and Ashantee-man in their huts,	  I see the Kruman in his hut, and the Dahoman and Ashantee-man in their huts,	  I see the Kruman in his hut, and the Dahoman and Ashantee-man in their huts,
  I see the Turk smoking opium in Aleppo,	  I see the Turk smoking opium in Aleppo,	  I see the Turk smoking opium in Aleppo,	  I see the Turk smoking opium in Aleppo,
  I see the picturesque crowds at the fairs of Khiva and those of Herat,	  I see the picturesque crowds at the fairs of Khiva and those of Herat,	  I see the picturesque crowds at the fairs of Khiva and those of Herat,	  I see the picturesque crowds at the fairs of Khiva and those of Herat,
  I see Teheran, I see Muscat and Medina and the intervening sands,	  I see Teheran, I see Muscat and Medina and the intervening sands,	  I see Teheran, I see Muscat and Medina and the intervening sands,	  I see Teheran, I see Muscat and Medina and the intervening sands,
      see the caravans toiling onward,	      see the caravans toiling onward,	      see the caravans toiling onward,	      see the caravans toiling onward,
  I see Egypt and the Egyptians, I see the pyramids and obelisks.	  I see Egypt and the Egyptians, I see the pyramids and obelisks.	  I see Egypt and the Egyptians, I see the pyramids and obelisks.	  I see Egypt and the Egyptians, I see the pyramids and obelisks.
  I look on chisell'd histories, records of conquering kings,	  I look on chisell'd histories, records of conquering kings,	  I look on chisell'd histories, records of conquering kings,	  I look on chisell'd histories, records of conquering kings,
      dynasties, cut in slabs of sand-stone, or on granite-blocks,	      dynasties, cut in slabs of sand-stone, or on granite-blocks,	      dynasties, cut in slabs of sand-stone, or on granite-blocks,	      dynasties, cut in slabs of sand-stone, or on granite-blocks,
  I see at Memphis mummy-pits containing mummies embalm'd,	  I see at Memphis mummy-pits containing mummies embalm'd,	  I see at Memphis mummy-pits containing mummies embalm'd,	  I see at Memphis mummy-pits containing mummies embalm'd,
      swathed in linen cloth, lying there many centuries,	      swathed in linen cloth, lying there many centuries,	      swathed in linen cloth, lying there many centuries,	      swathed in linen cloth, lying there many centuries,
  I look on the fall'n Theban, the large-ball'd eyes, the	  I look on the fall'n Theban, the large-ball'd eyes, the	  I look on the fall'n Theban, the large-ball'd eyes, the	  I look on the fall'n Theban, the large-ball'd eyes, the
      side-drooping neck, the hands folded across the breast.	      side-drooping neck, the hands folded across the breast.	      side-drooping neck, the hands folded across the breast.	      side-drooping neck, the hands folded across the breast.
			
  I see all the menials of the earth, laboring,	  I see all the menials of the earth, laboring,	  I see all the menials of the earth, laboring,	  I see all the menials of the earth, laboring,
  I see all the prisoners in the prisons,	  I see all the prisoners in the prisons,	  I see all the prisoners in the prisons,	  I see all the prisoners in the prisons,
  I see the defective human bodies of the earth,	  I see the defective human bodies of the earth,	  I see the defective human bodies of the earth,	  I see the defective human bodies of the earth,
  The blind, the deaf and dumb, idiots, hunchbacks, lunatics,	  The blind, the deaf and dumb, idiots, hunchbacks, lunatics,	  The blind, the deaf and dumb, idiots, hunchbacks, lunatics,	  The blind, the deaf and dumb, idiots, hunchbacks, lunatics,
  The pirates, thieves, betrayers, murderers, slave-makers of the earth,	  The pirates, thieves, betrayers, murderers, slave-makers of the earth,	  The pirates, thieves, betrayers, murderers, slave-makers of the earth,	  The pirates, thieves, betrayers, murderers, slave-makers of the earth,
  The helpless infants, and the helpless old men and women.	  The helpless infants, and the helpless old men and women.	  The helpless infants, and the helpless old men and women.	  The helpless infants, and the helpless old men and women.
			
  I see male and female everywhere,	  I see male and female everywhere,	  I see male and female everywhere,	  I see male and female everywhere,
  I see the serene brotherhood of philosophs,	  I see the serene brotherhood of philosophs,	  I see the serene brotherhood of philosophs,	  I see the serene brotherhood of philosophs,
  I see the constructiveness of my race,	  I see the constructiveness of my race,	  I see the constructiveness of my race,	  I see the constructiveness of my race,
  I see the results of the perseverance and industry of my race,	  I see the results of the perseverance and industry of my race,	  I see the results of the perseverance and industry of my race,	  I see the results of the perseverance and industry of my race,
  I see ranks, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, I go among them, I	  I see ranks, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, I go among them, I	  I see ranks, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, I go among them, I	  I see ranks, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, I go among them, I
      mix indiscriminately,	      mix indiscriminately,	      mix indiscriminately,	      mix indiscriminately,
  And I salute all the inhabitants of the earth.	  And I salute all the inhabitants of the earth.	  And I salute all the inhabitants of the earth.	  And I salute all the inhabitants of the earth.
			
       11	       11	       11	       11
  You whoever you are!	  You whoever you are!	  You whoever you are!	  You whoever you are!
  You daughter or son of England!	  You daughter or son of England!	  You daughter or son of England!	  You daughter or son of England!
  You of the mighty Slavic tribes and empires! you Russ in Russia!	  You of the mighty Slavic tribes and empires! you Russ in Russia!	  You of the mighty Slavic tribes and empires! you Russ in Russia!	  You of the mighty Slavic tribes and empires! you Russ in Russia!
  You dim-descended, black, divine-soul'd African, large, fine-headed,	  You dim-descended, black, divine-soul'd African, large, fine-headed,	  You dim-descended, black, divine-soul'd African, large, fine-headed,	  You dim-descended, black, divine-soul'd African, large, fine-headed,
      nobly-form'd, superbly destin'd, on equal terms with me!	      nobly-form'd, superbly destin'd, on equal terms with me!	      nobly-form'd, superbly destin'd, on equal terms with me!	      nobly-form'd, superbly destin'd, on equal terms with me!
  You Norwegian! Swede! Dane! Icelander! you Prussian!	  You Norwegian! Swede! Dane! Icelander! you Prussian!	  You Norwegian! Swede! Dane! Icelander! you Prussian!	  You Norwegian! Swede! Dane! Icelander! you Prussian!
  You Spaniard of Spain! you Portuguese!	  You Spaniard of Spain! you Portuguese!	  You Spaniard of Spain! you Portuguese!	  You Spaniard of Spain! you Portuguese!
  You Frenchwoman and Frenchman of France!	  You Frenchwoman and Frenchman of France!	  You Frenchwoman and Frenchman of France!	  You Frenchwoman and Frenchman of France!
  You Belge! you liberty-lover of the Netherlands! (you stock whence I	  You Belge! you liberty-lover of the Netherlands! (you stock whence I	  You Belge! you liberty-lover of the Netherlands! (you stock whence I	  You Belge! you liberty-lover of the Netherlands! (you stock whence I
      myself have descended;)	      myself have descended;)	      myself have descended;)	      myself have descended;)
  You sturdy Austrian! you Lombard! Hun! Bohemian! farmer of Styria!	  You sturdy Austrian! you Lombard! Hun! Bohemian! farmer of Styria!	  You sturdy Austrian! you Lombard! Hun! Bohemian! farmer of Styria!	  You sturdy Austrian! you Lombard! Hun! Bohemian! farmer of Styria!
  You neighbor of the Danube!	  You neighbor of the Danube!	  You neighbor of the Danube!	  You neighbor of the Danube!
  You working-man of the Rhine, the Elbe, or the Weser! you working-woman too!	  You working-man of the Rhine, the Elbe, or the Weser! you working-woman too!	  You working-man of the Rhine, the Elbe, or the Weser! you working-woman too!	  You working-man of the Rhine, the Elbe, or the Weser! you working-woman too!
  You Sardinian! you Bavarian! Swabian! Saxon! Wallachian! Bulgarian!	  You Sardinian! you Bavarian! Swabian! Saxon! Wallachian! Bulgarian!	  You Sardinian! you Bavarian! Swabian! Saxon! Wallachian! Bulgarian!	  You Sardinian! you Bavarian! Swabian! Saxon! Wallachian! Bulgarian!
  You Roman! Neapolitan! you Greek!	  You Roman! Neapolitan! you Greek!	  You Roman! Neapolitan! you Greek!	  You Roman! Neapolitan! you Greek!
  You lithe matador in the arena at Seville!	  You lithe matador in the arena at Seville!	  You lithe matador in the arena at Seville!	  You lithe matador in the arena at Seville!
  You mountaineer living lawlessly on the Taurus or Caucasus!	  You mountaineer living lawlessly on the Taurus or Caucasus!	  You mountaineer living lawlessly on the Taurus or Caucasus!	  You mountaineer living lawlessly on the Taurus or Caucasus!
  You Bokh horse-herd watching your mares and stallions feeding!	  You Bokh horse-herd watching your mares and stallions feeding!	  You Bokh horse-herd watching your mares and stallions feeding!	  You Bokh horse-herd watching your mares and stallions feeding!
  You beautiful-bodied Persian at full speed in the saddle shooting	  You beautiful-bodied Persian at full speed in the saddle shooting	  You beautiful-bodied Persian at full speed in the saddle shooting	  You beautiful-bodied Persian at full speed in the saddle shooting
      arrows to the mark!	      arrows to the mark!	      arrows to the mark!	      arrows to the mark!
  You Chinaman and Chinawoman of China! you Tartar of Tartary!	  You Chinaman and Chinawoman of China! you Tartar of Tartary!	  You Chinaman and Chinawoman of China! you Tartar of Tartary!	  You Chinaman and Chinawoman of China! you Tartar of Tartary!
  You women of the earth subordinated at your tasks!	  You women of the earth subordinated at your tasks!	  You women of the earth subordinated at your tasks!	  You women of the earth subordinated at your tasks!
  You Jew journeying in your old age through every risk to stand once	  You Jew journeying in your old age through every risk to stand once	  You Jew journeying in your old age through every risk to stand once	  You Jew journeying in your old age through every risk to stand once
      on Syrian ground!	      on Syrian ground!	      on Syrian ground!	      on Syrian ground!
  You other Jews waiting in all lands for your Messiah!	  You other Jews waiting in all lands for your Messiah!	  You other Jews waiting in all lands for your Messiah!	  You other Jews waiting in all lands for your Messiah!
  You thoughtful Armenian pondering by some stream of the Euphrates!	  You thoughtful Armenian pondering by some stream of the Euphrates!	  You thoughtful Armenian pondering by some stream of the Euphrates!	  You thoughtful Armenian pondering by some stream of the Euphrates!
      you peering amid the ruins of Nineveh! you ascending mount Ararat!	      you peering amid the ruins of Nineveh! you ascending mount Ararat!	      you peering amid the ruins of Nineveh! you ascending mount Ararat!	      you peering amid the ruins of Nineveh! you ascending mount Ararat!
  You foot-worn pilgrim welcoming the far-away sparkle of the minarets	  You foot-worn pilgrim welcoming the far-away sparkle of the minarets	  You foot-worn pilgrim welcoming the far-away sparkle of the minarets	  You foot-worn pilgrim welcoming the far-away sparkle of the minarets
      of Mecca!	      of Mecca!	      of Mecca!	      of Mecca!
  You sheiks along the stretch from Suez to Bab-el-mandeb ruling your	  You sheiks along the stretch from Suez to Bab-el-mandeb ruling your	  You sheiks along the stretch from Suez to Bab-el-mandeb ruling your	  You sheiks along the stretch from Suez to Bab-el-mandeb ruling your
      families and tribes!	      families and tribes!	      families and tribes!	      families and tribes!
  You olive-grower tending your fruit on fields of Nazareth, Damascus,	  You olive-grower tending your fruit on fields of Nazareth, Damascus,	  You olive-grower tending your fruit on fields of Nazareth, Damascus,	  You olive-grower tending your fruit on fields of Nazareth, Damascus,
      or lake Tiberias!	      or lake Tiberias!	      or lake Tiberias!	      or lake Tiberias!
  You Thibet trader on the wide inland or bargaining in the shops of Lassa!	  You Thibet trader on the wide inland or bargaining in the shops of Lassa!	  You Thibet trader on the wide inland or bargaining in the shops of Lassa!	  You Thibet trader on the wide inland or bargaining in the shops of Lassa!
  You Japanese man or woman! you liver in Madagascar, Ceylon, Sumatra, Borneo!	  You Japanese man or woman! you liver in Madagascar, Ceylon, Sumatra, Borneo!	  You Japanese man or woman! you liver in Madagascar, Ceylon, Sumatra, Borneo!	  You Japanese man or woman! you liver in Madagascar, Ceylon, Sumatra, Borneo!
  All you continentals of Asia, Africa, Europe, Australia, indifferent	  All you continentals of Asia, Africa, Europe, Australia, indifferent	  All you continentals of Asia, Africa, Europe, Australia, indifferent	  All you continentals of Asia, Africa, Europe, Australia, indifferent
      of place!	      of place!	      of place!	      of place!
  All you on the numberless islands of the archipelagoes of the sea!	  All you on the numberless islands of the archipelagoes of the sea!	  All you on the numberless islands of the archipelagoes of the sea!	  All you on the numberless islands of the archipelagoes of the sea!
  And you of centuries hence when you listen to me!	  And you of centuries hence when you listen to me!	  And you of centuries hence when you listen to me!	  And you of centuries hence when you listen to me!
  And you each and everywhere whom I specify not, but include just the same!	  And you each and everywhere whom I specify not, but include just the same!	  And you each and everywhere whom I specify not, but include just the same!	  And you each and everywhere whom I specify not, but include just the same!
  Health to you! good will to you all, from me and America sent!	  Health to you! good will to you all, from me and America sent!	  Health to you! good will to you all, from me and America sent!	  Health to you! good will to you all, from me and America sent!
			
  Each of us inevitable,	  Each of us inevitable,	  Each of us inevitable,	  Each of us inevitable,
  Each of us limitless--each of us with his or her right upon the earth,	  Each of us limitless--each of us with his or her right upon the earth,	  Each of us limitless--each of us with his or her right upon the earth,	  Each of us limitless--each of us with his or her right upon the earth,
  Each of us allow'd the eternal purports of the earth,	  Each of us allow'd the eternal purports of the earth,	  Each of us allow'd the eternal purports of the earth,	  Each of us allow'd the eternal purports of the earth,
  Each of us here as divinely as any is here.	  Each of us here as divinely as any is here.	  Each of us here as divinely as any is here.	  Each of us here as divinely as any is here.
			
       12	       12	       12	       12
  You Hottentot with clicking palate! you woolly-hair'd hordes!	  You Hottentot with clicking palate! you woolly-hair'd hordes!	  You Hottentot with clicking palate! you woolly-hair'd hordes!	  You Hottentot with clicking palate! you woolly-hair'd hordes!
  You own'd persons dropping sweat-drops or blood-drops!	  You own'd persons dropping sweat-drops or blood-drops!	  You own'd persons dropping sweat-drops or blood-drops!	  You own'd persons dropping sweat-drops or blood-drops!
  You human forms with the fathomless ever-impressive countenances of brutes!	  You human forms with the fathomless ever-impressive countenances of brutes!	  You human forms with the fathomless ever-impressive countenances of brutes!	  You human forms with the fathomless ever-impressive countenances of brutes!
  You poor koboo whom the meanest of the rest look down upon for all	  You poor koboo whom the meanest of the rest look down upon for all	  You poor koboo whom the meanest of the rest look down upon for all	  You poor koboo whom the meanest of the rest look down upon for all
      your glimmering language and spirituality!	      your glimmering language and spirituality!	      your glimmering language and spirituality!	      your glimmering language and spirituality!
  You dwarf'd Kamtschatkan, Greenlander, Lapp!	  You dwarf'd Kamtschatkan, Greenlander, Lapp!	  You dwarf'd Kamtschatkan, Greenlander, Lapp!	  You dwarf'd Kamtschatkan, Greenlander, Lapp!
  You Austral negro, naked, red, sooty, with protrusive lip,	  You Austral negro, naked, red, sooty, with protrusive lip,	  You Austral negro, naked, red, sooty, with protrusive lip,	  You Austral negro, naked, red, sooty, with protrusive lip,
      groveling, seeking your food!	      groveling, seeking your food!	      groveling, seeking your food!	      groveling, seeking your food!
  You Caffre, Berber, Soudanese!	  You Caffre, Berber, Soudanese!	  You Caffre, Berber, Soudanese!	  You Caffre, Berber, Soudanese!
  You haggard, uncouth, untutor'd Bedowee!	  You haggard, uncouth, untutor'd Bedowee!	  You haggard, uncouth, untutor'd Bedowee!	  You haggard, uncouth, untutor'd Bedowee!
  You plague-swarms in Madras, Nankin, Kaubul, Cairo!	  You plague-swarms in Madras, Nankin, Kaubul, Cairo!	  You plague-swarms in Madras, Nankin, Kaubul, Cairo!	  You plague-swarms in Madras, Nankin, Kaubul, Cairo!
  You benighted roamer of Amazonia! you Patagonian! you Feejeeman!	  You benighted roamer of Amazonia! you Patagonian! you Feejeeman!	  You benighted roamer of Amazonia! you Patagonian! you Feejeeman!	  You benighted roamer of Amazonia! you Patagonian! you Feejeeman!
  I do not prefer others so very much before you either,	  I do not prefer others so very much before you either,	  I do not prefer others so very much before you either,	  I do not prefer others so very much before you either,
  I do not say one word against you, away back there where you stand,	  I do not say one word against you, away back there where you stand,	  I do not say one word against you, away back there where you stand,	  I do not say one word against you, away back there where you stand,
  (You will come forward in due time to my side.)	  (You will come forward in due time to my side.)	  (You will come forward in due time to my side.)	  (You will come forward in due time to my side.)
			
       13	       13	       13	       13
  My spirit has pass'd in compassion and determination around the whole earth,	  My spirit has pass'd in compassion and determination around the whole earth,	  My spirit has pass'd in compassion and determination around the whole earth,	  My spirit has pass'd in compassion and determination around the whole earth,
  I have look'd for equals and lovers and found them ready for me in	  I have look'd for equals and lovers and found them ready for me in	  I have look'd for equals and lovers and found them ready for me in	  I have look'd for equals and lovers and found them ready for me in
      all lands,	      all lands,	      all lands,	      all lands,
  I think some divine rapport has equalized me with them.	  I think some divine rapport has equalized me with them.	  I think some divine rapport has equalized me with them.	  I think some divine rapport has equalized me with them.
			
  You vapors, I think I have risen with you, moved away to distant	  You vapors, I think I have risen with you, moved away to distant	  You vapors, I think I have risen with you, moved away to distant	  You vapors, I think I have risen with you, moved away to distant
      continents, and fallen down there, for reasons,	      continents, and fallen down there, for reasons,	      continents, and fallen down there, for reasons,	      continents, and fallen down there, for reasons,
  I think I have blown with you you winds;	  I think I have blown with you you winds;	  I think I have blown with you you winds;	  I think I have blown with you you winds;
  You waters I have finger'd every shore with you,	  You waters I have finger'd every shore with you,	  You waters I have finger'd every shore with you,	  You waters I have finger'd every shore with you,
  I have run through what any river or strait of the globe has run through,	  I have run through what any river or strait of the globe has run through,	  I have run through what any river or strait of the globe has run through,	  I have run through what any river or strait of the globe has run through,
  I have taken my stand on the bases of peninsulas and on the high	  I have taken my stand on the bases of peninsulas and on the high	  I have taken my stand on the bases of peninsulas and on the high	  I have taken my stand on the bases of peninsulas and on the high
      embedded rocks, to cry thence:	      embedded rocks, to cry thence:	      embedded rocks, to cry thence:	      embedded rocks, to cry thence:
			
  What cities the light or warmth penetrates I penetrate those cities myself,	  What cities the light or warmth penetrates I penetrate those cities myself,	  What cities the light or warmth penetrates I penetrate those cities myself,	  What cities the light or warmth penetrates I penetrate those cities myself,
  All islands to which birds wing their way I wing my way myself.	  All islands to which birds wing their way I wing my way myself.	  All islands to which birds wing their way I wing my way myself.	  All islands to which birds wing their way I wing my way myself.
			
  Toward you all, in America's name,	  Toward you all, in America's name,	  Toward you all, in America's name,	  Toward you all, in America's name,
  I raise high the perpendicular hand, I make the signal,	  I raise high the perpendicular hand, I make the signal,	  I raise high the perpendicular hand, I make the signal,	  I raise high the perpendicular hand, I make the signal,
  To remain after me in sight forever,	  To remain after me in sight forever,	  To remain after me in sight forever,	  To remain after me in sight forever,
  For all the haunts and homes of men.	  For all the haunts and homes of men.	  For all the haunts and homes of men.	  For all the haunts and homes of men.
			
			
			
			
BOOK VII	BOOK VII	BOOK VII	BOOK VII
			
			
Song of the Open Road	Song of the Open Road	Song of the Open Road	Song of the Open Road
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road,	  Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road,	  Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road,	  Afoot and light-hearted I take to the open road,
  Healthy, free, the world before me,	  Healthy, free, the world before me,	  Healthy, free, the world before me,	  Healthy, free, the world before me,
  The long brown path before me leading wherever I choose.	  The long brown path before me leading wherever I choose.	  The long brown path before me leading wherever I choose.	  The long brown path before me leading wherever I choose.
			
  Henceforth I ask not good-fortune, I myself am good-fortune,	  Henceforth I ask not good-fortune, I myself am good-fortune,	  Henceforth I ask not good-fortune, I myself am good-fortune,	  Henceforth I ask not good-fortune, I myself am good-fortune,
  Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more, need nothing,	  Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more, need nothing,	  Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more, need nothing,	  Henceforth I whimper no more, postpone no more, need nothing,
  Done with indoor complaints, libraries, querulous criticisms,	  Done with indoor complaints, libraries, querulous criticisms,	  Done with indoor complaints, libraries, querulous criticisms,	  Done with indoor complaints, libraries, querulous criticisms,
  Strong and content I travel the open road.	  Strong and content I travel the open road.	  Strong and content I travel the open road.	  Strong and content I travel the open road.
			
  The earth, that is sufficient,	  The earth, that is sufficient,	  The earth, that is sufficient,	  The earth, that is sufficient,
  I do not want the constellations any nearer,	  I do not want the constellations any nearer,	  I do not want the constellations any nearer,	  I do not want the constellations any nearer,
  I know they are very well where they are,	  I know they are very well where they are,	  I know they are very well where they are,	  I know they are very well where they are,
  I know they suffice for those who belong to them.	  I know they suffice for those who belong to them.	  I know they suffice for those who belong to them.	  I know they suffice for those who belong to them.
			
  (Still here I carry my old delicious burdens,	  (Still here I carry my old delicious burdens,	  (Still here I carry my old delicious burdens,	  (Still here I carry my old delicious burdens,
  I carry them, men and women, I carry them with me wherever I go,	  I carry them, men and women, I carry them with me wherever I go,	  I carry them, men and women, I carry them with me wherever I go,	  I carry them, men and women, I carry them with me wherever I go,
  I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them,	  I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them,	  I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them,	  I swear it is impossible for me to get rid of them,
  I am fill'd with them, and I will fill them in return.)	  I am fill'd with them, and I will fill them in return.)	  I am fill'd with them, and I will fill them in return.)	  I am fill'd with them, and I will fill them in return.)
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  You road I enter upon and look around, I believe you are not all	  You road I enter upon and look around, I believe you are not all	  You road I enter upon and look around, I believe you are not all	  You road I enter upon and look around, I believe you are not all
      that is here,	      that is here,	      that is here,	      that is here,
  I believe that much unseen is also here.	  I believe that much unseen is also here.	  I believe that much unseen is also here.	  I believe that much unseen is also here.
			
  Here the profound lesson of reception, nor preference nor denial,	  Here the profound lesson of reception, nor preference nor denial,	  Here the profound lesson of reception, nor preference nor denial,	  Here the profound lesson of reception, nor preference nor denial,
  The black with his woolly head, the felon, the diseas'd, the	  The black with his woolly head, the felon, the diseas'd, the	  The black with his woolly head, the felon, the diseas'd, the	  The black with his woolly head, the felon, the diseas'd, the
      illiterate person, are not denied;	      illiterate person, are not denied;	      illiterate person, are not denied;	      illiterate person, are not denied;
  The birth, the hasting after the physician, the beggar's tramp, the	  The birth, the hasting after the physician, the beggar's tramp, the	  The birth, the hasting after the physician, the beggar's tramp, the	  The birth, the hasting after the physician, the beggar's tramp, the
      drunkard's stagger, the laughing party of mechanics,	      drunkard's stagger, the laughing party of mechanics,	      drunkard's stagger, the laughing party of mechanics,	      drunkard's stagger, the laughing party of mechanics,
  The escaped youth, the rich person's carriage, the fop, the eloping couple,	  The escaped youth, the rich person's carriage, the fop, the eloping couple,	  The escaped youth, the rich person's carriage, the fop, the eloping couple,	  The escaped youth, the rich person's carriage, the fop, the eloping couple,
  The early market-man, the hearse, the moving of furniture into the	  The early market-man, the hearse, the moving of furniture into the	  The early market-man, the hearse, the moving of furniture into the	  The early market-man, the hearse, the moving of furniture into the
      town, the return back from the town,	      town, the return back from the town,	      town, the return back from the town,	      town, the return back from the town,
  They pass, I also pass, any thing passes, none can be interdicted,	  They pass, I also pass, any thing passes, none can be interdicted,	  They pass, I also pass, any thing passes, none can be interdicted,	  They pass, I also pass, any thing passes, none can be interdicted,
  None but are accepted, none but shall be dear to me.	  None but are accepted, none but shall be dear to me.	  None but are accepted, none but shall be dear to me.	  None but are accepted, none but shall be dear to me.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  You air that serves me with breath to speak!	  You air that serves me with breath to speak!	  You air that serves me with breath to speak!	  You air that serves me with breath to speak!
  You objects that call from diffusion my meanings and give them shape!	  You objects that call from diffusion my meanings and give them shape!	  You objects that call from diffusion my meanings and give them shape!	  You objects that call from diffusion my meanings and give them shape!
  You light that wraps me and all things in delicate equable showers!	  You light that wraps me and all things in delicate equable showers!	  You light that wraps me and all things in delicate equable showers!	  You light that wraps me and all things in delicate equable showers!
  You paths worn in the irregular hollows by the roadsides!	  You paths worn in the irregular hollows by the roadsides!	  You paths worn in the irregular hollows by the roadsides!	  You paths worn in the irregular hollows by the roadsides!
  I believe you are latent with unseen existences, you are so dear to me.	  I believe you are latent with unseen existences, you are so dear to me.	  I believe you are latent with unseen existences, you are so dear to me.	  I believe you are latent with unseen existences, you are so dear to me.
			
  You flagg'd walks of the cities! you strong curbs at the edges!	  You flagg'd walks of the cities! you strong curbs at the edges!	  You flagg'd walks of the cities! you strong curbs at the edges!	  You flagg'd walks of the cities! you strong curbs at the edges!
  You ferries! you planks and posts of wharves! you timber-lined	  You ferries! you planks and posts of wharves! you timber-lined	  You ferries! you planks and posts of wharves! you timber-lined	  You ferries! you planks and posts of wharves! you timber-lined
      side! you distant ships!	      side! you distant ships!	      side! you distant ships!	      side! you distant ships!
  You rows of houses! you window-pierc'd facades! you roofs!	  You rows of houses! you window-pierc'd facades! you roofs!	  You rows of houses! you window-pierc'd facades! you roofs!	  You rows of houses! you window-pierc'd facades! you roofs!
  You porches and entrances! you copings and iron guards!	  You porches and entrances! you copings and iron guards!	  You porches and entrances! you copings and iron guards!	  You porches and entrances! you copings and iron guards!
  You windows whose transparent shells might expose so much!	  You windows whose transparent shells might expose so much!	  You windows whose transparent shells might expose so much!	  You windows whose transparent shells might expose so much!
  You doors and ascending steps! you arches!	  You doors and ascending steps! you arches!	  You doors and ascending steps! you arches!	  You doors and ascending steps! you arches!
  You gray stones of interminable pavements! you trodden crossings!	  You gray stones of interminable pavements! you trodden crossings!	  You gray stones of interminable pavements! you trodden crossings!	  You gray stones of interminable pavements! you trodden crossings!
  From all that has touch'd you I believe you have imparted to	  From all that has touch'd you I believe you have imparted to	  From all that has touch'd you I believe you have imparted to	  From all that has touch'd you I believe you have imparted to
      yourselves, and now would impart the same secretly to me,	      yourselves, and now would impart the same secretly to me,	      yourselves, and now would impart the same secretly to me,	      yourselves, and now would impart the same secretly to me,
  From the living and the dead you have peopled your impassive surfaces,	  From the living and the dead you have peopled your impassive surfaces,	  From the living and the dead you have peopled your impassive surfaces,	  From the living and the dead you have peopled your impassive surfaces,
      and the spirits thereof would be evident and amicable with me.	      and the spirits thereof would be evident and amicable with me.	      and the spirits thereof would be evident and amicable with me.	      and the spirits thereof would be evident and amicable with me.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  The earth expanding right hand and left hand,	  The earth expanding right hand and left hand,	  The earth expanding right hand and left hand,	  The earth expanding right hand and left hand,
  The picture alive, every part in its best light,	  The picture alive, every part in its best light,	  The picture alive, every part in its best light,	  The picture alive, every part in its best light,
  The music falling in where it is wanted, and stopping where it is	  The music falling in where it is wanted, and stopping where it is	  The music falling in where it is wanted, and stopping where it is	  The music falling in where it is wanted, and stopping where it is
      not wanted,	      not wanted,	      not wanted,	      not wanted,
  The cheerful voice of the public road, the gay fresh sentiment of the road.	  The cheerful voice of the public road, the gay fresh sentiment of the road.	  The cheerful voice of the public road, the gay fresh sentiment of the road.	  The cheerful voice of the public road, the gay fresh sentiment of the road.
			
  O highway I travel, do you say to me Do not leave me?	  O highway I travel, do you say to me Do not leave me?	  O highway I travel, do you say to me Do not leave me?	  O highway I travel, do you say to me Do not leave me?
  Do you say Venture not--if you leave me you are lost?	  Do you say Venture not--if you leave me you are lost?	  Do you say Venture not--if you leave me you are lost?	  Do you say Venture not--if you leave me you are lost?
  Do you say I am already prepared, I am well-beaten and undenied,	  Do you say I am already prepared, I am well-beaten and undenied,	  Do you say I am already prepared, I am well-beaten and undenied,	  Do you say I am already prepared, I am well-beaten and undenied,
      adhere to me?	      adhere to me?	      adhere to me?	      adhere to me?
			
  O public road, I say back I am not afraid to leave you, yet I love you,	  O public road, I say back I am not afraid to leave you, yet I love you,	  O public road, I say back I am not afraid to leave you, yet I love you,	  O public road, I say back I am not afraid to leave you, yet I love you,
  You express me better than I can express myself,	  You express me better than I can express myself,	  You express me better than I can express myself,	  You express me better than I can express myself,
  You shall be more to me than my poem.	  You shall be more to me than my poem.	  You shall be more to me than my poem.	  You shall be more to me than my poem.
			
  I think heroic deeds were all conceiv'd in the open air, and all	  I think heroic deeds were all conceiv'd in the open air, and all	  I think heroic deeds were all conceiv'd in the open air, and all	  I think heroic deeds were all conceiv'd in the open air, and all
      free poems also,	      free poems also,	      free poems also,	      free poems also,
  I think I could stop here myself and do miracles,	  I think I could stop here myself and do miracles,	  I think I could stop here myself and do miracles,	  I think I could stop here myself and do miracles,
  I think whatever I shall meet on the road I shall like, and whoever	  I think whatever I shall meet on the road I shall like, and whoever	  I think whatever I shall meet on the road I shall like, and whoever	  I think whatever I shall meet on the road I shall like, and whoever
      beholds me shall like me,	      beholds me shall like me,	      beholds me shall like me,	      beholds me shall like me,
  I think whoever I see must be happy.	  I think whoever I see must be happy.	  I think whoever I see must be happy.	  I think whoever I see must be happy.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  From this hour I ordain myself loos'd of limits and imaginary lines,	  From this hour I ordain myself loos'd of limits and imaginary lines,	  From this hour I ordain myself loos'd of limits and imaginary lines,	  From this hour I ordain myself loos'd of limits and imaginary lines,
  Going where I list, my own master total and absolute,	  Going where I list, my own master total and absolute,	  Going where I list, my own master total and absolute,	  Going where I list, my own master total and absolute,
  Listening to others, considering well what they say,	  Listening to others, considering well what they say,	  Listening to others, considering well what they say,	  Listening to others, considering well what they say,
  Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating,	  Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating,	  Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating,	  Pausing, searching, receiving, contemplating,
  Gently, but with undeniable will, divesting myself of the holds that	  Gently, but with undeniable will, divesting myself of the holds that	  Gently, but with undeniable will, divesting myself of the holds that	  Gently, but with undeniable will, divesting myself of the holds that
      would hold me.	      would hold me.	      would hold me.	      would hold me.
			
  I inhale great draughts of space,	  I inhale great draughts of space,	  I inhale great draughts of space,	  I inhale great draughts of space,
  The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine.	  The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine.	  The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine.	  The east and the west are mine, and the north and the south are mine.
			
  I am larger, better than I thought,	  I am larger, better than I thought,	  I am larger, better than I thought,	  I am larger, better than I thought,
  I did not know I held so much goodness.	  I did not know I held so much goodness.	  I did not know I held so much goodness.	  I did not know I held so much goodness.
			
  All seems beautiful to me,	  All seems beautiful to me,	  All seems beautiful to me,	  All seems beautiful to me,
  can repeat over to men and women You have done such good to me	  can repeat over to men and women You have done such good to me	  can repeat over to men and women You have done such good to me	  can repeat over to men and women You have done such good to me
      I would do the same to you,	      I would do the same to you,	      I would do the same to you,	      I would do the same to you,
  I will recruit for myself and you as I go,	  I will recruit for myself and you as I go,	  I will recruit for myself and you as I go,	  I will recruit for myself and you as I go,
  I will scatter myself among men and women as I go,	  I will scatter myself among men and women as I go,	  I will scatter myself among men and women as I go,	  I will scatter myself among men and women as I go,
  I will toss a new gladness and roughness among them,	  I will toss a new gladness and roughness among them,	  I will toss a new gladness and roughness among them,	  I will toss a new gladness and roughness among them,
  Whoever denies me it shall not trouble me,	  Whoever denies me it shall not trouble me,	  Whoever denies me it shall not trouble me,	  Whoever denies me it shall not trouble me,
  Whoever accepts me he or she shall be blessed and shall bless me.	  Whoever accepts me he or she shall be blessed and shall bless me.	  Whoever accepts me he or she shall be blessed and shall bless me.	  Whoever accepts me he or she shall be blessed and shall bless me.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Now if a thousand perfect men were to appear it would not amaze me,	  Now if a thousand perfect men were to appear it would not amaze me,	  Now if a thousand perfect men were to appear it would not amaze me,	  Now if a thousand perfect men were to appear it would not amaze me,
  Now if a thousand beautiful forms of women appear'd it would not	  Now if a thousand beautiful forms of women appear'd it would not	  Now if a thousand beautiful forms of women appear'd it would not	  Now if a thousand beautiful forms of women appear'd it would not
      astonish me.	      astonish me.	      astonish me.	      astonish me.
			
  Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,	  Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,	  Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,	  Now I see the secret of the making of the best persons,
  It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.	  It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.	  It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.	  It is to grow in the open air and to eat and sleep with the earth.
			
  Here a great personal deed has room,	  Here a great personal deed has room,	  Here a great personal deed has room,	  Here a great personal deed has room,
  (Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,	  (Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,	  (Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,	  (Such a deed seizes upon the hearts of the whole race of men,
  Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all	  Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all	  Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all	  Its effusion of strength and will overwhelms law and mocks all
      authority and all argument against it.)	      authority and all argument against it.)	      authority and all argument against it.)	      authority and all argument against it.)
			
  Here is the test of wisdom,	  Here is the test of wisdom,	  Here is the test of wisdom,	  Here is the test of wisdom,
  Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,	  Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,	  Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,	  Wisdom is not finally tested in schools,
  Wisdom cannot be pass'd from one having it to another not having it,	  Wisdom cannot be pass'd from one having it to another not having it,	  Wisdom cannot be pass'd from one having it to another not having it,	  Wisdom cannot be pass'd from one having it to another not having it,
  Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,	  Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,	  Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,	  Wisdom is of the soul, is not susceptible of proof, is its own proof,
  Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,	  Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,	  Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,	  Applies to all stages and objects and qualities and is content,
  Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the	  Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the	  Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the	  Is the certainty of the reality and immortality of things, and the
      excellence of things;	      excellence of things;	      excellence of things;	      excellence of things;
  Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes	  Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes	  Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes	  Something there is in the float of the sight of things that provokes
      it out of the soul.	      it out of the soul.	      it out of the soul.	      it out of the soul.
			
  Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,	  Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,	  Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,	  Now I re-examine philosophies and religions,
  They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the	  They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the	  They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the	  They may prove well in lecture-rooms, yet not prove at all under the
      spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.	      spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.	      spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.	      spacious clouds and along the landscape and flowing currents.
			
  Here is realization,	  Here is realization,	  Here is realization,	  Here is realization,
  Here is a man tallied--he realizes here what he has in him,	  Here is a man tallied--he realizes here what he has in him,	  Here is a man tallied--he realizes here what he has in him,	  Here is a man tallied--he realizes here what he has in him,
  The past, the future, majesty, love--if they are vacant of you, you	  The past, the future, majesty, love--if they are vacant of you, you	  The past, the future, majesty, love--if they are vacant of you, you	  The past, the future, majesty, love--if they are vacant of you, you
      are vacant of them.	      are vacant of them.	      are vacant of them.	      are vacant of them.
			
  Only the kernel of every object nourishes;	  Only the kernel of every object nourishes;	  Only the kernel of every object nourishes;	  Only the kernel of every object nourishes;
  Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me?	  Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me?	  Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me?	  Where is he who tears off the husks for you and me?
  Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for you and me?	  Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for you and me?	  Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for you and me?	  Where is he that undoes stratagems and envelopes for you and me?
			
  Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion'd, it is apropos;	  Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion'd, it is apropos;	  Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion'd, it is apropos;	  Here is adhesiveness, it is not previously fashion'd, it is apropos;
  Do you know what it is as you pass to be loved by strangers?	  Do you know what it is as you pass to be loved by strangers?	  Do you know what it is as you pass to be loved by strangers?	  Do you know what it is as you pass to be loved by strangers?
  Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls?	  Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls?	  Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls?	  Do you know the talk of those turning eye-balls?
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  Here is the efflux of the soul,	  Here is the efflux of the soul,	  Here is the efflux of the soul,	  Here is the efflux of the soul,
  The efflux of the soul comes from within through embower'd gates,	  The efflux of the soul comes from within through embower'd gates,	  The efflux of the soul comes from within through embower'd gates,	  The efflux of the soul comes from within through embower'd gates,
      ever provoking questions,	      ever provoking questions,	      ever provoking questions,	      ever provoking questions,
  These yearnings why are they? these thoughts in the darkness why are they?	  These yearnings why are they? these thoughts in the darkness why are they?	  These yearnings why are they? these thoughts in the darkness why are they?	  These yearnings why are they? these thoughts in the darkness why are they?
  Why are there men and women that while they are nigh me the sunlight	  Why are there men and women that while they are nigh me the sunlight	  Why are there men and women that while they are nigh me the sunlight	  Why are there men and women that while they are nigh me the sunlight
      expands my blood?	      expands my blood?	      expands my blood?	      expands my blood?
  Why when they leave me do my pennants of joy sink flat and lank?	  Why when they leave me do my pennants of joy sink flat and lank?	  Why when they leave me do my pennants of joy sink flat and lank?	  Why when they leave me do my pennants of joy sink flat and lank?
  Why are there trees I never walk under but large and melodious	  Why are there trees I never walk under but large and melodious	  Why are there trees I never walk under but large and melodious	  Why are there trees I never walk under but large and melodious
      thoughts descend upon me?	      thoughts descend upon me?	      thoughts descend upon me?	      thoughts descend upon me?
  (I think they hang there winter and summer on those trees and always	  (I think they hang there winter and summer on those trees and always	  (I think they hang there winter and summer on those trees and always	  (I think they hang there winter and summer on those trees and always
      drop fruit as I pass;)	      drop fruit as I pass;)	      drop fruit as I pass;)	      drop fruit as I pass;)
  What is it I interchange so suddenly with strangers?	  What is it I interchange so suddenly with strangers?	  What is it I interchange so suddenly with strangers?	  What is it I interchange so suddenly with strangers?
  What with some driver as I ride on the seat by his side?	  What with some driver as I ride on the seat by his side?	  What with some driver as I ride on the seat by his side?	  What with some driver as I ride on the seat by his side?
  What with some fisherman drawing his seine by the shore as I walk by	  What with some fisherman drawing his seine by the shore as I walk by	  What with some fisherman drawing his seine by the shore as I walk by	  What with some fisherman drawing his seine by the shore as I walk by
      and pause?	      and pause?	      and pause?	      and pause?
  What gives me to be free to a woman's and man's good-will? what	  What gives me to be free to a woman's and man's good-will? what	  What gives me to be free to a woman's and man's good-will? what	  What gives me to be free to a woman's and man's good-will? what
      gives them to be free to mine?	      gives them to be free to mine?	      gives them to be free to mine?	      gives them to be free to mine?
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  The efflux of the soul is happiness, here is happiness,	  The efflux of the soul is happiness, here is happiness,	  The efflux of the soul is happiness, here is happiness,	  The efflux of the soul is happiness, here is happiness,
  I think it pervades the open air, waiting at all times,	  I think it pervades the open air, waiting at all times,	  I think it pervades the open air, waiting at all times,	  I think it pervades the open air, waiting at all times,
  Now it flows unto us, we are rightly charged.	  Now it flows unto us, we are rightly charged.	  Now it flows unto us, we are rightly charged.	  Now it flows unto us, we are rightly charged.
			
  Here rises the fluid and attaching character,	  Here rises the fluid and attaching character,	  Here rises the fluid and attaching character,	  Here rises the fluid and attaching character,
  The fluid and attaching character is the freshness and sweetness of	  The fluid and attaching character is the freshness and sweetness of	  The fluid and attaching character is the freshness and sweetness of	  The fluid and attaching character is the freshness and sweetness of
      man and woman,	      man and woman,	      man and woman,	      man and woman,
  (The herbs of the morning sprout no fresher and sweeter every day	  (The herbs of the morning sprout no fresher and sweeter every day	  (The herbs of the morning sprout no fresher and sweeter every day	  (The herbs of the morning sprout no fresher and sweeter every day
      out of the roots of themselves, than it sprouts fresh and sweet	      out of the roots of themselves, than it sprouts fresh and sweet	      out of the roots of themselves, than it sprouts fresh and sweet	      out of the roots of themselves, than it sprouts fresh and sweet
      continually out of itself.)	      continually out of itself.)	      continually out of itself.)	      continually out of itself.)
			
  Toward the fluid and attaching character exudes the sweat of the	  Toward the fluid and attaching character exudes the sweat of the	  Toward the fluid and attaching character exudes the sweat of the	  Toward the fluid and attaching character exudes the sweat of the
      love of young and old,	      love of young and old,	      love of young and old,	      love of young and old,
  From it falls distill'd the charm that mocks beauty and attainments,	  From it falls distill'd the charm that mocks beauty and attainments,	  From it falls distill'd the charm that mocks beauty and attainments,	  From it falls distill'd the charm that mocks beauty and attainments,
  Toward it heaves the shuddering longing ache of contact.	  Toward it heaves the shuddering longing ache of contact.	  Toward it heaves the shuddering longing ache of contact.	  Toward it heaves the shuddering longing ache of contact.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  Allons! whoever you are come travel with me!	  Allons! whoever you are come travel with me!	  Allons! whoever you are come travel with me!	  Allons! whoever you are come travel with me!
  Traveling with me you find what never tires.	  Traveling with me you find what never tires.	  Traveling with me you find what never tires.	  Traveling with me you find what never tires.
			
  The earth never tires,	  The earth never tires,	  The earth never tires,	  The earth never tires,
  The earth is rude, silent, incomprehensible at first, Nature is rude	  The earth is rude, silent, incomprehensible at first, Nature is rude	  The earth is rude, silent, incomprehensible at first, Nature is rude	  The earth is rude, silent, incomprehensible at first, Nature is rude
      and incomprehensible at first,	      and incomprehensible at first,	      and incomprehensible at first,	      and incomprehensible at first,
  Be not discouraged, keep on, there are divine things well envelop'd,	  Be not discouraged, keep on, there are divine things well envelop'd,	  Be not discouraged, keep on, there are divine things well envelop'd,	  Be not discouraged, keep on, there are divine things well envelop'd,
  I swear to you there are divine things more beautiful than words can tell.	  I swear to you there are divine things more beautiful than words can tell.	  I swear to you there are divine things more beautiful than words can tell.	  I swear to you there are divine things more beautiful than words can tell.
			
  Allons! we must not stop here,	  Allons! we must not stop here,	  Allons! we must not stop here,	  Allons! we must not stop here,
  However sweet these laid-up stores, however convenient this dwelling	  However sweet these laid-up stores, however convenient this dwelling	  However sweet these laid-up stores, however convenient this dwelling	  However sweet these laid-up stores, however convenient this dwelling
      we cannot remain here,	      we cannot remain here,	      we cannot remain here,	      we cannot remain here,
  However shelter'd this port and however calm these waters we must	  However shelter'd this port and however calm these waters we must	  However shelter'd this port and however calm these waters we must	  However shelter'd this port and however calm these waters we must
      not anchor here,	      not anchor here,	      not anchor here,	      not anchor here,
  However welcome the hospitality that surrounds us we are permitted	  However welcome the hospitality that surrounds us we are permitted	  However welcome the hospitality that surrounds us we are permitted	  However welcome the hospitality that surrounds us we are permitted
      to receive it but a little while.	      to receive it but a little while.	      to receive it but a little while.	      to receive it but a little while.
			
       10	       10	       10	       10
  Allons! the inducements shall be greater,	  Allons! the inducements shall be greater,	  Allons! the inducements shall be greater,	  Allons! the inducements shall be greater,
  We will sail pathless and wild seas,	  We will sail pathless and wild seas,	  We will sail pathless and wild seas,	  We will sail pathless and wild seas,
  We will go where winds blow, waves dash, and the Yankee clipper	  We will go where winds blow, waves dash, and the Yankee clipper	  We will go where winds blow, waves dash, and the Yankee clipper	  We will go where winds blow, waves dash, and the Yankee clipper
      speeds by under full sail.	      speeds by under full sail.	      speeds by under full sail.	      speeds by under full sail.
			
  Allons! with power, liberty, the earth, the elements,	  Allons! with power, liberty, the earth, the elements,	  Allons! with power, liberty, the earth, the elements,	  Allons! with power, liberty, the earth, the elements,
  Health, defiance, gayety, self-esteem, curiosity;	  Health, defiance, gayety, self-esteem, curiosity;	  Health, defiance, gayety, self-esteem, curiosity;	  Health, defiance, gayety, self-esteem, curiosity;
  Allons! from all formules!	  Allons! from all formules!	  Allons! from all formules!	  Allons! from all formules!
  From your formules, O bat-eyed and materialistic priests.	  From your formules, O bat-eyed and materialistic priests.	  From your formules, O bat-eyed and materialistic priests.	  From your formules, O bat-eyed and materialistic priests.
			
  The stale cadaver blocks up the passage--the burial waits no longer.	  The stale cadaver blocks up the passage--the burial waits no longer.	  The stale cadaver blocks up the passage--the burial waits no longer.	  The stale cadaver blocks up the passage--the burial waits no longer.
			
  Allons! yet take warning!	  Allons! yet take warning!	  Allons! yet take warning!	  Allons! yet take warning!
  He traveling with me needs the best blood, thews, endurance,	  He traveling with me needs the best blood, thews, endurance,	  He traveling with me needs the best blood, thews, endurance,	  He traveling with me needs the best blood, thews, endurance,
  None may come to the trial till he or she bring courage and health,	  None may come to the trial till he or she bring courage and health,	  None may come to the trial till he or she bring courage and health,	  None may come to the trial till he or she bring courage and health,
  Come not here if you have already spent the best of yourself,	  Come not here if you have already spent the best of yourself,	  Come not here if you have already spent the best of yourself,	  Come not here if you have already spent the best of yourself,
  Only those may come who come in sweet and determin'd bodies,	  Only those may come who come in sweet and determin'd bodies,	  Only those may come who come in sweet and determin'd bodies,	  Only those may come who come in sweet and determin'd bodies,
  No diseas'd person, no rum-drinker or venereal taint is permitted here.	  No diseas'd person, no rum-drinker or venereal taint is permitted here.	  No diseas'd person, no rum-drinker or venereal taint is permitted here.	  No diseas'd person, no rum-drinker or venereal taint is permitted here.
			
  (I and mine do not convince by arguments, similes, rhymes,	  (I and mine do not convince by arguments, similes, rhymes,	  (I and mine do not convince by arguments, similes, rhymes,	  (I and mine do not convince by arguments, similes, rhymes,
  We convince by our presence.)	  We convince by our presence.)	  We convince by our presence.)	  We convince by our presence.)
			
       11	       11	       11	       11
  Listen! I will be honest with you,	  Listen! I will be honest with you,	  Listen! I will be honest with you,	  Listen! I will be honest with you,
  I do not offer the old smooth prizes, but offer rough new prizes,	  I do not offer the old smooth prizes, but offer rough new prizes,	  I do not offer the old smooth prizes, but offer rough new prizes,	  I do not offer the old smooth prizes, but offer rough new prizes,
  These are the days that must happen to you:	  These are the days that must happen to you:	  These are the days that must happen to you:	  These are the days that must happen to you:
  You shall not heap up what is call'd riches,	  You shall not heap up what is call'd riches,	  You shall not heap up what is call'd riches,	  You shall not heap up what is call'd riches,
  You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn or achieve,	  You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn or achieve,	  You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn or achieve,	  You shall scatter with lavish hand all that you earn or achieve,
  You but arrive at the city to which you were destin'd, you hardly	  You but arrive at the city to which you were destin'd, you hardly	  You but arrive at the city to which you were destin'd, you hardly	  You but arrive at the city to which you were destin'd, you hardly
      settle yourself to satisfaction before you are call'd by an	      settle yourself to satisfaction before you are call'd by an	      settle yourself to satisfaction before you are call'd by an	      settle yourself to satisfaction before you are call'd by an
      irresistible call to depart,	      irresistible call to depart,	      irresistible call to depart,	      irresistible call to depart,
  You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mockings of those	  You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mockings of those	  You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mockings of those	  You shall be treated to the ironical smiles and mockings of those
      who remain behind you,	      who remain behind you,	      who remain behind you,	      who remain behind you,
  What beckonings of love you receive you shall only answer with	  What beckonings of love you receive you shall only answer with	  What beckonings of love you receive you shall only answer with	  What beckonings of love you receive you shall only answer with
      passionate kisses of parting,	      passionate kisses of parting,	      passionate kisses of parting,	      passionate kisses of parting,
  You shall not allow the hold of those who spread their reach'd hands	  You shall not allow the hold of those who spread their reach'd hands	  You shall not allow the hold of those who spread their reach'd hands	  You shall not allow the hold of those who spread their reach'd hands
      toward you.	      toward you.	      toward you.	      toward you.
			
       12	       12	       12	       12
  Allons! after the great Companions, and to belong to them!	  Allons! after the great Companions, and to belong to them!	  Allons! after the great Companions, and to belong to them!	  Allons! after the great Companions, and to belong to them!
  They too are on the road--they are the swift and majestic men--they	  They too are on the road--they are the swift and majestic men--they	  They too are on the road--they are the swift and majestic men--they	  They too are on the road--they are the swift and majestic men--they
      are the greatest women,	      are the greatest women,	      are the greatest women,	      are the greatest women,
  Enjoyers of calms of seas and storms of seas,	  Enjoyers of calms of seas and storms of seas,	  Enjoyers of calms of seas and storms of seas,	  Enjoyers of calms of seas and storms of seas,
  Sailors of many a ship, walkers of many a mile of land,	  Sailors of many a ship, walkers of many a mile of land,	  Sailors of many a ship, walkers of many a mile of land,	  Sailors of many a ship, walkers of many a mile of land,
  Habitues of many distant countries, habitues of far-distant dwellings,	  Habitues of many distant countries, habitues of far-distant dwellings,	  Habitues of many distant countries, habitues of far-distant dwellings,	  Habitues of many distant countries, habitues of far-distant dwellings,
  Trusters of men and women, observers of cities, solitary toilers,	  Trusters of men and women, observers of cities, solitary toilers,	  Trusters of men and women, observers of cities, solitary toilers,	  Trusters of men and women, observers of cities, solitary toilers,
  Pausers and contemplators of tufts, blossoms, shells of the shore,	  Pausers and contemplators of tufts, blossoms, shells of the shore,	  Pausers and contemplators of tufts, blossoms, shells of the shore,	  Pausers and contemplators of tufts, blossoms, shells of the shore,
  Dancers at wedding-dances, kissers of brides, tender helpers of	  Dancers at wedding-dances, kissers of brides, tender helpers of	  Dancers at wedding-dances, kissers of brides, tender helpers of	  Dancers at wedding-dances, kissers of brides, tender helpers of
      children, bearers of children,	      children, bearers of children,	      children, bearers of children,	      children, bearers of children,
  Soldiers of revolts, standers by gaping graves, lowerers-down of coffins,	  Soldiers of revolts, standers by gaping graves, lowerers-down of coffins,	  Soldiers of revolts, standers by gaping graves, lowerers-down of coffins,	  Soldiers of revolts, standers by gaping graves, lowerers-down of coffins,
  Journeyers over consecutive seasons, over the years, the curious	  Journeyers over consecutive seasons, over the years, the curious	  Journeyers over consecutive seasons, over the years, the curious	  Journeyers over consecutive seasons, over the years, the curious
      years each emerging from that which preceded it,	      years each emerging from that which preceded it,	      years each emerging from that which preceded it,	      years each emerging from that which preceded it,
  Journeyers as with companions, namely their own diverse phases,	  Journeyers as with companions, namely their own diverse phases,	  Journeyers as with companions, namely their own diverse phases,	  Journeyers as with companions, namely their own diverse phases,
  Forth-steppers from the latent unrealized baby-days,	  Forth-steppers from the latent unrealized baby-days,	  Forth-steppers from the latent unrealized baby-days,	  Forth-steppers from the latent unrealized baby-days,
  Journeyers gayly with their own youth, journeyers with their bearded	  Journeyers gayly with their own youth, journeyers with their bearded	  Journeyers gayly with their own youth, journeyers with their bearded	  Journeyers gayly with their own youth, journeyers with their bearded
      and well-grain'd manhood,	      and well-grain'd manhood,	      and well-grain'd manhood,	      and well-grain'd manhood,
  Journeyers with their womanhood, ample, unsurpass'd, content,	  Journeyers with their womanhood, ample, unsurpass'd, content,	  Journeyers with their womanhood, ample, unsurpass'd, content,	  Journeyers with their womanhood, ample, unsurpass'd, content,
  Journeyers with their own sublime old age of manhood or womanhood,	  Journeyers with their own sublime old age of manhood or womanhood,	  Journeyers with their own sublime old age of manhood or womanhood,	  Journeyers with their own sublime old age of manhood or womanhood,
  Old age, calm, expanded, broad with the haughty breadth of the universe,	  Old age, calm, expanded, broad with the haughty breadth of the universe,	  Old age, calm, expanded, broad with the haughty breadth of the universe,	  Old age, calm, expanded, broad with the haughty breadth of the universe,
  Old age, flowing free with the delicious near-by freedom of death.	  Old age, flowing free with the delicious near-by freedom of death.	  Old age, flowing free with the delicious near-by freedom of death.	  Old age, flowing free with the delicious near-by freedom of death.
			
       13	       13	       13	       13
  Allons! to that which is endless as it was beginningless,	  Allons! to that which is endless as it was beginningless,	  Allons! to that which is endless as it was beginningless,	  Allons! to that which is endless as it was beginningless,
  To undergo much, tramps of days, rests of nights,	  To undergo much, tramps of days, rests of nights,	  To undergo much, tramps of days, rests of nights,	  To undergo much, tramps of days, rests of nights,
  To merge all in the travel they tend to, and the days and nights	  To merge all in the travel they tend to, and the days and nights	  To merge all in the travel they tend to, and the days and nights	  To merge all in the travel they tend to, and the days and nights
      they tend to,	      they tend to,	      they tend to,	      they tend to,
  Again to merge them in the start of superior journeys,	  Again to merge them in the start of superior journeys,	  Again to merge them in the start of superior journeys,	  Again to merge them in the start of superior journeys,
  To see nothing anywhere but what you may reach it and pass it,	  To see nothing anywhere but what you may reach it and pass it,	  To see nothing anywhere but what you may reach it and pass it,	  To see nothing anywhere but what you may reach it and pass it,
  To conceive no time, however distant, but what you may reach it and pass it,	  To conceive no time, however distant, but what you may reach it and pass it,	  To conceive no time, however distant, but what you may reach it and pass it,	  To conceive no time, however distant, but what you may reach it and pass it,
  To look up or down no road but it stretches and waits for you,	  To look up or down no road but it stretches and waits for you,	  To look up or down no road but it stretches and waits for you,	  To look up or down no road but it stretches and waits for you,
      however long but it stretches and waits for you,	      however long but it stretches and waits for you,	      however long but it stretches and waits for you,	      however long but it stretches and waits for you,
  To see no being, not God's or any, but you also go thither,	  To see no being, not God's or any, but you also go thither,	  To see no being, not God's or any, but you also go thither,	  To see no being, not God's or any, but you also go thither,
  To see no possession but you may possess it, enjoying all without	  To see no possession but you may possess it, enjoying all without	  To see no possession but you may possess it, enjoying all without	  To see no possession but you may possess it, enjoying all without
      labor or purchase, abstracting the feast yet not abstracting one	      labor or purchase, abstracting the feast yet not abstracting one	      labor or purchase, abstracting the feast yet not abstracting one	      labor or purchase, abstracting the feast yet not abstracting one
      particle of it,	      particle of it,	      particle of it,	      particle of it,
  To take the best of the farmer's farm and the rich man's elegant	  To take the best of the farmer's farm and the rich man's elegant	  To take the best of the farmer's farm and the rich man's elegant	  To take the best of the farmer's farm and the rich man's elegant
      villa, and the chaste blessings of the well-married couple, and	      villa, and the chaste blessings of the well-married couple, and	      villa, and the chaste blessings of the well-married couple, and	      villa, and the chaste blessings of the well-married couple, and
      the fruits of orchards and flowers of gardens,	      the fruits of orchards and flowers of gardens,	      the fruits of orchards and flowers of gardens,	      the fruits of orchards and flowers of gardens,
  To take to your use out of the compact cities as you pass through,	  To take to your use out of the compact cities as you pass through,	  To take to your use out of the compact cities as you pass through,	  To take to your use out of the compact cities as you pass through,
  To carry buildings and streets with you afterward wherever you go,	  To carry buildings and streets with you afterward wherever you go,	  To carry buildings and streets with you afterward wherever you go,	  To carry buildings and streets with you afterward wherever you go,
  To gather the minds of men out of their brains as you encounter	  To gather the minds of men out of their brains as you encounter	  To gather the minds of men out of their brains as you encounter	  To gather the minds of men out of their brains as you encounter
      them, to gather the love out of their hearts,	      them, to gather the love out of their hearts,	      them, to gather the love out of their hearts,	      them, to gather the love out of their hearts,
  To take your lovers on the road with you, for all that you leave	  To take your lovers on the road with you, for all that you leave	  To take your lovers on the road with you, for all that you leave	  To take your lovers on the road with you, for all that you leave
      them behind you,	      them behind you,	      them behind you,	      them behind you,
  To know the universe itself as a road, as many roads, as roads for	  To know the universe itself as a road, as many roads, as roads for	  To know the universe itself as a road, as many roads, as roads for	  To know the universe itself as a road, as many roads, as roads for
      traveling souls.	      traveling souls.	      traveling souls.	      traveling souls.
			
  All parts away for the progress of souls,	  All parts away for the progress of souls,	  All parts away for the progress of souls,	  All parts away for the progress of souls,
  All religion, all solid things, arts, governments--all that was or is	  All religion, all solid things, arts, governments--all that was or is	  All religion, all solid things, arts, governments--all that was or is	  All religion, all solid things, arts, governments--all that was or is
      apparent upon this globe or any globe, falls into niches and corners	      apparent upon this globe or any globe, falls into niches and corners	      apparent upon this globe or any globe, falls into niches and corners	      apparent upon this globe or any globe, falls into niches and corners
      before the procession of souls along the grand roads of the universe.	      before the procession of souls along the grand roads of the universe.	      before the procession of souls along the grand roads of the universe.	      before the procession of souls along the grand roads of the universe.
			
  Of the progress of the souls of men and women along the grand roads of	  Of the progress of the souls of men and women along the grand roads of	  Of the progress of the souls of men and women along the grand roads of	  Of the progress of the souls of men and women along the grand roads of
      the universe, all other progress is the needed emblem and sustenance.	      the universe, all other progress is the needed emblem and sustenance.	      the universe, all other progress is the needed emblem and sustenance.	      the universe, all other progress is the needed emblem and sustenance.
			
  Forever alive, forever forward,	  Forever alive, forever forward,	  Forever alive, forever forward,	  Forever alive, forever forward,
  Stately, solemn, sad, withdrawn, baffled, mad, turbulent, feeble,	  Stately, solemn, sad, withdrawn, baffled, mad, turbulent, feeble,	  Stately, solemn, sad, withdrawn, baffled, mad, turbulent, feeble,	  Stately, solemn, sad, withdrawn, baffled, mad, turbulent, feeble,
      dissatisfied,	      dissatisfied,	      dissatisfied,	      dissatisfied,
  Desperate, proud, fond, sick, accepted by men, rejected by men,	  Desperate, proud, fond, sick, accepted by men, rejected by men,	  Desperate, proud, fond, sick, accepted by men, rejected by men,	  Desperate, proud, fond, sick, accepted by men, rejected by men,
  They go! they go! I know that they go, but I know not where they go,	  They go! they go! I know that they go, but I know not where they go,	  They go! they go! I know that they go, but I know not where they go,	  They go! they go! I know that they go, but I know not where they go,
  But I know that they go toward the best--toward something great.	  But I know that they go toward the best--toward something great.	  But I know that they go toward the best--toward something great.	  But I know that they go toward the best--toward something great.
			
  Whoever you are, come forth! or man or woman come forth!	  Whoever you are, come forth! or man or woman come forth!	  Whoever you are, come forth! or man or woman come forth!	  Whoever you are, come forth! or man or woman come forth!
  You must not stay sleeping and dallying there in the house, though	  You must not stay sleeping and dallying there in the house, though	  You must not stay sleeping and dallying there in the house, though	  You must not stay sleeping and dallying there in the house, though
      you built it, or though it has been built for you.	      you built it, or though it has been built for you.	      you built it, or though it has been built for you.	      you built it, or though it has been built for you.
			
  Out of the dark confinement! out from behind the screen!	  Out of the dark confinement! out from behind the screen!	  Out of the dark confinement! out from behind the screen!	  Out of the dark confinement! out from behind the screen!
  It is useless to protest, I know all and expose it.	  It is useless to protest, I know all and expose it.	  It is useless to protest, I know all and expose it.	  It is useless to protest, I know all and expose it.
			
  Behold through you as bad as the rest,	  Behold through you as bad as the rest,	  Behold through you as bad as the rest,	  Behold through you as bad as the rest,
  Through the laughter, dancing, dining, supping, of people,	  Through the laughter, dancing, dining, supping, of people,	  Through the laughter, dancing, dining, supping, of people,	  Through the laughter, dancing, dining, supping, of people,
  Inside of dresses and ornaments, inside of those wash'd and trimm'd faces,	  Inside of dresses and ornaments, inside of those wash'd and trimm'd faces,	  Inside of dresses and ornaments, inside of those wash'd and trimm'd faces,	  Inside of dresses and ornaments, inside of those wash'd and trimm'd faces,
  Behold a secret silent loathing and despair.	  Behold a secret silent loathing and despair.	  Behold a secret silent loathing and despair.	  Behold a secret silent loathing and despair.
			
  No husband, no wife, no friend, trusted to hear the confession,	  No husband, no wife, no friend, trusted to hear the confession,	  No husband, no wife, no friend, trusted to hear the confession,	  No husband, no wife, no friend, trusted to hear the confession,
  Another self, a duplicate of every one, skulking and hiding it goes,	  Another self, a duplicate of every one, skulking and hiding it goes,	  Another self, a duplicate of every one, skulking and hiding it goes,	  Another self, a duplicate of every one, skulking and hiding it goes,
  Formless and wordless through the streets of the cities, polite and	  Formless and wordless through the streets of the cities, polite and	  Formless and wordless through the streets of the cities, polite and	  Formless and wordless through the streets of the cities, polite and
      bland in the parlors,	      bland in the parlors,	      bland in the parlors,	      bland in the parlors,
  In the cars of railroads, in steamboats, in the public assembly,	  In the cars of railroads, in steamboats, in the public assembly,	  In the cars of railroads, in steamboats, in the public assembly,	  In the cars of railroads, in steamboats, in the public assembly,
  Home to the houses of men and women, at the table, in the bedroom,	  Home to the houses of men and women, at the table, in the bedroom,	  Home to the houses of men and women, at the table, in the bedroom,	  Home to the houses of men and women, at the table, in the bedroom,
      everywhere,	      everywhere,	      everywhere,	      everywhere,
  Smartly attired, countenance smiling, form upright, death under the	  Smartly attired, countenance smiling, form upright, death under the	  Smartly attired, countenance smiling, form upright, death under the	  Smartly attired, countenance smiling, form upright, death under the
      breast-bones, hell under the skull-bones,	      breast-bones, hell under the skull-bones,	      breast-bones, hell under the skull-bones,	      breast-bones, hell under the skull-bones,
  Under the broadcloth and gloves, under the ribbons and artificial flowers,	  Under the broadcloth and gloves, under the ribbons and artificial flowers,	  Under the broadcloth and gloves, under the ribbons and artificial flowers,	  Under the broadcloth and gloves, under the ribbons and artificial flowers,
  Keeping fair with the customs, speaking not a syllable of itself,	  Keeping fair with the customs, speaking not a syllable of itself,	  Keeping fair with the customs, speaking not a syllable of itself,	  Keeping fair with the customs, speaking not a syllable of itself,
  Speaking of any thing else but never of itself.	  Speaking of any thing else but never of itself.	  Speaking of any thing else but never of itself.	  Speaking of any thing else but never of itself.
			
       14	       14	       14	       14
  Allons! through struggles and wars!	  Allons! through struggles and wars!	  Allons! through struggles and wars!	  Allons! through struggles and wars!
  The goal that was named cannot be countermanded.	  The goal that was named cannot be countermanded.	  The goal that was named cannot be countermanded.	  The goal that was named cannot be countermanded.
			
  Have the past struggles succeeded?	  Have the past struggles succeeded?	  Have the past struggles succeeded?	  Have the past struggles succeeded?
  What has succeeded? yourself? your nation? Nature?	  What has succeeded? yourself? your nation? Nature?	  What has succeeded? yourself? your nation? Nature?	  What has succeeded? yourself? your nation? Nature?
  Now understand me well--it is provided in the essence of things that	  Now understand me well--it is provided in the essence of things that	  Now understand me well--it is provided in the essence of things that	  Now understand me well--it is provided in the essence of things that
      from any fruition of success, no matter what, shall come forth	      from any fruition of success, no matter what, shall come forth	      from any fruition of success, no matter what, shall come forth	      from any fruition of success, no matter what, shall come forth
      something to make a greater struggle necessary.	      something to make a greater struggle necessary.	      something to make a greater struggle necessary.	      something to make a greater struggle necessary.
			
  My call is the call of battle, I nourish active rebellion,	  My call is the call of battle, I nourish active rebellion,	  My call is the call of battle, I nourish active rebellion,	  My call is the call of battle, I nourish active rebellion,
  He going with me must go well arm'd,	  He going with me must go well arm'd,	  He going with me must go well arm'd,	  He going with me must go well arm'd,
  He going with me goes often with spare diet, poverty, angry enemies,	  He going with me goes often with spare diet, poverty, angry enemies,	  He going with me goes often with spare diet, poverty, angry enemies,	  He going with me goes often with spare diet, poverty, angry enemies,
      desertions.	      desertions.	      desertions.	      desertions.
			
       15	       15	       15	       15
  Allons! the road is before us!	  Allons! the road is before us!	  Allons! the road is before us!	  Allons! the road is before us!
  It is safe--I have tried it--my own feet have tried it well--be not	  It is safe--I have tried it--my own feet have tried it well--be not	  It is safe--I have tried it--my own feet have tried it well--be not	  It is safe--I have tried it--my own feet have tried it well--be not
      detain'd!	      detain'd!	      detain'd!	      detain'd!
  Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the book on the	  Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the book on the	  Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the book on the	  Let the paper remain on the desk unwritten, and the book on the
      shelf unopen'd!	      shelf unopen'd!	      shelf unopen'd!	      shelf unopen'd!
  Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money remain unearn'd!	  Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money remain unearn'd!	  Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money remain unearn'd!	  Let the tools remain in the workshop! let the money remain unearn'd!
  Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher!	  Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher!	  Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher!	  Let the school stand! mind not the cry of the teacher!
  Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the	  Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the	  Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the	  Let the preacher preach in his pulpit! let the lawyer plead in the
      court, and the judge expound the law.	      court, and the judge expound the law.	      court, and the judge expound the law.	      court, and the judge expound the law.
			
  Camerado, I give you my hand!	  Camerado, I give you my hand!	  Camerado, I give you my hand!	  Camerado, I give you my hand!
  I give you my love more precious than money,	  I give you my love more precious than money,	  I give you my love more precious than money,	  I give you my love more precious than money,
  I give you myself before preaching or law;	  I give you myself before preaching or law;	  I give you myself before preaching or law;	  I give you myself before preaching or law;
  Will you give me yourself? will you come travel with me?	  Will you give me yourself? will you come travel with me?	  Will you give me yourself? will you come travel with me?	  Will you give me yourself? will you come travel with me?
  Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?	  Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?	  Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?	  Shall we stick by each other as long as we live?
			
			
			
			
BOOK VIII	BOOK VIII	BOOK VIII	BOOK VIII
			
			
Crossing Brooklyn Ferry	Crossing Brooklyn Ferry	Crossing Brooklyn Ferry	Crossing Brooklyn Ferry
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Flood-tide below me! I see you face to face!	  Flood-tide below me! I see you face to face!	  Flood-tide below me! I see you face to face!	  Flood-tide below me! I see you face to face!
  Clouds of the west--sun there half an hour high--I see you also face	  Clouds of the west--sun there half an hour high--I see you also face	  Clouds of the west--sun there half an hour high--I see you also face	  Clouds of the west--sun there half an hour high--I see you also face
      to face.	      to face.	      to face.	      to face.
			
  Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious	  Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious	  Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious	  Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes, how curious
      you are to me!	      you are to me!	      you are to me!	      you are to me!
  On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning	  On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning	  On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning	  On the ferry-boats the hundreds and hundreds that cross, returning
      home, are more curious to me than you suppose,	      home, are more curious to me than you suppose,	      home, are more curious to me than you suppose,	      home, are more curious to me than you suppose,
  And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more	  And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more	  And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more	  And you that shall cross from shore to shore years hence are more
      to me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose.	      to me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose.	      to me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose.	      to me, and more in my meditations, than you might suppose.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day,	  The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day,	  The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day,	  The impalpable sustenance of me from all things at all hours of the day,
  The simple, compact, well-join'd scheme, myself disintegrated, every	  The simple, compact, well-join'd scheme, myself disintegrated, every	  The simple, compact, well-join'd scheme, myself disintegrated, every	  The simple, compact, well-join'd scheme, myself disintegrated, every
      one disintegrated yet part of the scheme,	      one disintegrated yet part of the scheme,	      one disintegrated yet part of the scheme,	      one disintegrated yet part of the scheme,
  The similitudes of the past and those of the future,	  The similitudes of the past and those of the future,	  The similitudes of the past and those of the future,	  The similitudes of the past and those of the future,
  The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings, on	  The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings, on	  The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings, on	  The glories strung like beads on my smallest sights and hearings, on
      the walk in the street and the passage over the river,	      the walk in the street and the passage over the river,	      the walk in the street and the passage over the river,	      the walk in the street and the passage over the river,
  The current rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away,	  The current rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away,	  The current rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away,	  The current rushing so swiftly and swimming with me far away,
  The others that are to follow me, the ties between me and them,	  The others that are to follow me, the ties between me and them,	  The others that are to follow me, the ties between me and them,	  The others that are to follow me, the ties between me and them,
  The certainty of others, the life, love, sight, hearing of others.	  The certainty of others, the life, love, sight, hearing of others.	  The certainty of others, the life, love, sight, hearing of others.	  The certainty of others, the life, love, sight, hearing of others.
			
  Others will enter the gates of the ferry and cross from shore to shore,	  Others will enter the gates of the ferry and cross from shore to shore,	  Others will enter the gates of the ferry and cross from shore to shore,	  Others will enter the gates of the ferry and cross from shore to shore,
  Others will watch the run of the flood-tide,	  Others will watch the run of the flood-tide,	  Others will watch the run of the flood-tide,	  Others will watch the run of the flood-tide,
  Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and west, and the	  Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and west, and the	  Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and west, and the	  Others will see the shipping of Manhattan north and west, and the
      heights of Brooklyn to the south and east,	      heights of Brooklyn to the south and east,	      heights of Brooklyn to the south and east,	      heights of Brooklyn to the south and east,
  Others will see the islands large and small;	  Others will see the islands large and small;	  Others will see the islands large and small;	  Others will see the islands large and small;
  Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross, the sun half	  Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross, the sun half	  Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross, the sun half	  Fifty years hence, others will see them as they cross, the sun half
      an hour high,	      an hour high,	      an hour high,	      an hour high,
  A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years hence, others	  A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years hence, others	  A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years hence, others	  A hundred years hence, or ever so many hundred years hence, others
      will see them,	      will see them,	      will see them,	      will see them,
  Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring-in of the flood-tide, the	  Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring-in of the flood-tide, the	  Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring-in of the flood-tide, the	  Will enjoy the sunset, the pouring-in of the flood-tide, the
      falling-back to the sea of the ebb-tide.	      falling-back to the sea of the ebb-tide.	      falling-back to the sea of the ebb-tide.	      falling-back to the sea of the ebb-tide.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  It avails not, time nor place--distance avails not,	  It avails not, time nor place--distance avails not,	  It avails not, time nor place--distance avails not,	  It avails not, time nor place--distance avails not,
  I am with you, you men and women of a generation, or ever so many	  I am with you, you men and women of a generation, or ever so many	  I am with you, you men and women of a generation, or ever so many	  I am with you, you men and women of a generation, or ever so many
      generations hence,	      generations hence,	      generations hence,	      generations hence,
  Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky, so I felt,	  Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky, so I felt,	  Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky, so I felt,	  Just as you feel when you look on the river and sky, so I felt,
  Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one of a crowd,	  Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one of a crowd,	  Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one of a crowd,	  Just as any of you is one of a living crowd, I was one of a crowd,
  Just as you are refresh'd by the gladness of the river and the	  Just as you are refresh'd by the gladness of the river and the	  Just as you are refresh'd by the gladness of the river and the	  Just as you are refresh'd by the gladness of the river and the
      bright flow, I was refresh'd,	      bright flow, I was refresh'd,	      bright flow, I was refresh'd,	      bright flow, I was refresh'd,
  Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with the swift	  Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with the swift	  Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with the swift	  Just as you stand and lean on the rail, yet hurry with the swift
      current, I stood yet was hurried,	      current, I stood yet was hurried,	      current, I stood yet was hurried,	      current, I stood yet was hurried,
  Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships and the	  Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships and the	  Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships and the	  Just as you look on the numberless masts of ships and the
      thick-stemm'd pipes of steamboats, I look'd.	      thick-stemm'd pipes of steamboats, I look'd.	      thick-stemm'd pipes of steamboats, I look'd.	      thick-stemm'd pipes of steamboats, I look'd.
			
  I too many and many a time cross'd the river of old,	  I too many and many a time cross'd the river of old,	  I too many and many a time cross'd the river of old,	  I too many and many a time cross'd the river of old,
  Watched the Twelfth-month sea-gulls, saw them high in the air	  Watched the Twelfth-month sea-gulls, saw them high in the air	  Watched the Twelfth-month sea-gulls, saw them high in the air	  Watched the Twelfth-month sea-gulls, saw them high in the air
      floating with motionless wings, oscillating their bodies,	      floating with motionless wings, oscillating their bodies,	      floating with motionless wings, oscillating their bodies,	      floating with motionless wings, oscillating their bodies,
  Saw how the glistening yellow lit up parts of their bodies and left	  Saw how the glistening yellow lit up parts of their bodies and left	  Saw how the glistening yellow lit up parts of their bodies and left	  Saw how the glistening yellow lit up parts of their bodies and left
      the rest in strong shadow,	      the rest in strong shadow,	      the rest in strong shadow,	      the rest in strong shadow,
  Saw the slow-wheeling circles and the gradual edging toward the south,	  Saw the slow-wheeling circles and the gradual edging toward the south,	  Saw the slow-wheeling circles and the gradual edging toward the south,	  Saw the slow-wheeling circles and the gradual edging toward the south,
  Saw the reflection of the summer sky in the water,	  Saw the reflection of the summer sky in the water,	  Saw the reflection of the summer sky in the water,	  Saw the reflection of the summer sky in the water,
  Had my eyes dazzled by the shimmering track of beams,	  Had my eyes dazzled by the shimmering track of beams,	  Had my eyes dazzled by the shimmering track of beams,	  Had my eyes dazzled by the shimmering track of beams,
  Look'd at the fine centrifugal spokes of light round the shape of my	  Look'd at the fine centrifugal spokes of light round the shape of my	  Look'd at the fine centrifugal spokes of light round the shape of my	  Look'd at the fine centrifugal spokes of light round the shape of my
      head in the sunlit water,	      head in the sunlit water,	      head in the sunlit water,	      head in the sunlit water,
  Look'd on the haze on the hills southward and south-westward,	  Look'd on the haze on the hills southward and south-westward,	  Look'd on the haze on the hills southward and south-westward,	  Look'd on the haze on the hills southward and south-westward,
  Look'd on the vapor as it flew in fleeces tinged with violet,	  Look'd on the vapor as it flew in fleeces tinged with violet,	  Look'd on the vapor as it flew in fleeces tinged with violet,	  Look'd on the vapor as it flew in fleeces tinged with violet,
  Look'd toward the lower bay to notice the vessels arriving,	  Look'd toward the lower bay to notice the vessels arriving,	  Look'd toward the lower bay to notice the vessels arriving,	  Look'd toward the lower bay to notice the vessels arriving,
  Saw their approach, saw aboard those that were near me,	  Saw their approach, saw aboard those that were near me,	  Saw their approach, saw aboard those that were near me,	  Saw their approach, saw aboard those that were near me,
  Saw the white sails of schooners and sloops, saw the ships at anchor,	  Saw the white sails of schooners and sloops, saw the ships at anchor,	  Saw the white sails of schooners and sloops, saw the ships at anchor,	  Saw the white sails of schooners and sloops, saw the ships at anchor,
  The sailors at work in the rigging or out astride the spars,	  The sailors at work in the rigging or out astride the spars,	  The sailors at work in the rigging or out astride the spars,	  The sailors at work in the rigging or out astride the spars,
  The round masts, the swinging motion of the hulls, the slender	  The round masts, the swinging motion of the hulls, the slender	  The round masts, the swinging motion of the hulls, the slender	  The round masts, the swinging motion of the hulls, the slender
      serpentine pennants,	      serpentine pennants,	      serpentine pennants,	      serpentine pennants,
  The large and small steamers in motion, the pilots in their pilothouses,	  The large and small steamers in motion, the pilots in their pilothouses,	  The large and small steamers in motion, the pilots in their pilothouses,	  The large and small steamers in motion, the pilots in their pilothouses,
  The white wake left by the passage, the quick tremulous whirl of the wheels,	  The white wake left by the passage, the quick tremulous whirl of the wheels,	  The white wake left by the passage, the quick tremulous whirl of the wheels,	  The white wake left by the passage, the quick tremulous whirl of the wheels,
  The flags of all nations, the falling of them at sunset,	  The flags of all nations, the falling of them at sunset,	  The flags of all nations, the falling of them at sunset,	  The flags of all nations, the falling of them at sunset,
  The scallop-edged waves in the twilight, the ladled cups, the	  The scallop-edged waves in the twilight, the ladled cups, the	  The scallop-edged waves in the twilight, the ladled cups, the	  The scallop-edged waves in the twilight, the ladled cups, the
      frolic-some crests and glistening,	      frolic-some crests and glistening,	      frolic-some crests and glistening,	      frolic-some crests and glistening,
  The stretch afar growing dimmer and dimmer, the gray walls of the	  The stretch afar growing dimmer and dimmer, the gray walls of the	  The stretch afar growing dimmer and dimmer, the gray walls of the	  The stretch afar growing dimmer and dimmer, the gray walls of the
      granite storehouses by the docks,	      granite storehouses by the docks,	      granite storehouses by the docks,	      granite storehouses by the docks,
  On the river the shadowy group, the big steam-tug closely flank'd on	  On the river the shadowy group, the big steam-tug closely flank'd on	  On the river the shadowy group, the big steam-tug closely flank'd on	  On the river the shadowy group, the big steam-tug closely flank'd on
      each side by the barges, the hay-boat, the belated lighter,	      each side by the barges, the hay-boat, the belated lighter,	      each side by the barges, the hay-boat, the belated lighter,	      each side by the barges, the hay-boat, the belated lighter,
  On the neighboring shore the fires from the foundry chimneys burning	  On the neighboring shore the fires from the foundry chimneys burning	  On the neighboring shore the fires from the foundry chimneys burning	  On the neighboring shore the fires from the foundry chimneys burning
      high and glaringly into the night,	      high and glaringly into the night,	      high and glaringly into the night,	      high and glaringly into the night,
  Casting their flicker of black contrasted with wild red and yellow	  Casting their flicker of black contrasted with wild red and yellow	  Casting their flicker of black contrasted with wild red and yellow	  Casting their flicker of black contrasted with wild red and yellow
      light over the tops of houses, and down into the clefts of streets.	      light over the tops of houses, and down into the clefts of streets.	      light over the tops of houses, and down into the clefts of streets.	      light over the tops of houses, and down into the clefts of streets.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  These and all else were to me the same as they are to you,	  These and all else were to me the same as they are to you,	  These and all else were to me the same as they are to you,	  These and all else were to me the same as they are to you,
  I loved well those cities, loved well the stately and rapid river,	  I loved well those cities, loved well the stately and rapid river,	  I loved well those cities, loved well the stately and rapid river,	  I loved well those cities, loved well the stately and rapid river,
  The men and women I saw were all near to me,	  The men and women I saw were all near to me,	  The men and women I saw were all near to me,	  The men and women I saw were all near to me,
  Others the same--others who look back on me because I look'd forward	  Others the same--others who look back on me because I look'd forward	  Others the same--others who look back on me because I look'd forward	  Others the same--others who look back on me because I look'd forward
      to them,	      to them,	      to them,	      to them,
  (The time will come, though I stop here to-day and to-night.)	  (The time will come, though I stop here to-day and to-night.)	  (The time will come, though I stop here to-day and to-night.)	  (The time will come, though I stop here to-day and to-night.)
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  What is it then between us?	  What is it then between us?	  What is it then between us?	  What is it then between us?
  What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us?	  What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us?	  What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us?	  What is the count of the scores or hundreds of years between us?
			
  Whatever it is, it avails not--distance avails not, and place avails not,	  Whatever it is, it avails not--distance avails not, and place avails not,	  Whatever it is, it avails not--distance avails not, and place avails not,	  Whatever it is, it avails not--distance avails not, and place avails not,
  I too lived, Brooklyn of ample hills was mine,	  I too lived, Brooklyn of ample hills was mine,	  I too lived, Brooklyn of ample hills was mine,	  I too lived, Brooklyn of ample hills was mine,
  I too walk'd the streets of Manhattan island, and bathed in the	  I too walk'd the streets of Manhattan island, and bathed in the	  I too walk'd the streets of Manhattan island, and bathed in the	  I too walk'd the streets of Manhattan island, and bathed in the
      waters around it,	      waters around it,	      waters around it,	      waters around it,
  I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within me,	  I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within me,	  I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within me,	  I too felt the curious abrupt questionings stir within me,
  In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me,	  In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me,	  In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me,	  In the day among crowds of people sometimes they came upon me,
  In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon me,	  In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon me,	  In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon me,	  In my walks home late at night or as I lay in my bed they came upon me,
  I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution,	  I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution,	  I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution,	  I too had been struck from the float forever held in solution,
  I too had receiv'd identity by my body,	  I too had receiv'd identity by my body,	  I too had receiv'd identity by my body,	  I too had receiv'd identity by my body,
  That I was I knew was of my body, and what I should be I knew I	  That I was I knew was of my body, and what I should be I knew I	  That I was I knew was of my body, and what I should be I knew I	  That I was I knew was of my body, and what I should be I knew I
      should be of my body.	      should be of my body.	      should be of my body.	      should be of my body.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  It is not upon you alone the dark patches fall,	  It is not upon you alone the dark patches fall,	  It is not upon you alone the dark patches fall,	  It is not upon you alone the dark patches fall,
  The dark threw its patches down upon me also,	  The dark threw its patches down upon me also,	  The dark threw its patches down upon me also,	  The dark threw its patches down upon me also,
  The best I had done seem'd to me blank and suspicious,	  The best I had done seem'd to me blank and suspicious,	  The best I had done seem'd to me blank and suspicious,	  The best I had done seem'd to me blank and suspicious,
  My great thoughts as I supposed them, were they not in reality meagre?	  My great thoughts as I supposed them, were they not in reality meagre?	  My great thoughts as I supposed them, were they not in reality meagre?	  My great thoughts as I supposed them, were they not in reality meagre?
  Nor is it you alone who know what it is to be evil,	  Nor is it you alone who know what it is to be evil,	  Nor is it you alone who know what it is to be evil,	  Nor is it you alone who know what it is to be evil,
  I am he who knew what it was to be evil,	  I am he who knew what it was to be evil,	  I am he who knew what it was to be evil,	  I am he who knew what it was to be evil,
  I too knitted the old knot of contrariety,	  I too knitted the old knot of contrariety,	  I too knitted the old knot of contrariety,	  I too knitted the old knot of contrariety,
  Blabb'd, blush'd, resented, lied, stole, grudg'd,	  Blabb'd, blush'd, resented, lied, stole, grudg'd,	  Blabb'd, blush'd, resented, lied, stole, grudg'd,	  Blabb'd, blush'd, resented, lied, stole, grudg'd,
  Had guile, anger, lust, hot wishes I dared not speak,	  Had guile, anger, lust, hot wishes I dared not speak,	  Had guile, anger, lust, hot wishes I dared not speak,	  Had guile, anger, lust, hot wishes I dared not speak,
  Was wayward, vain, greedy, shallow, sly, cowardly, malignant,	  Was wayward, vain, greedy, shallow, sly, cowardly, malignant,	  Was wayward, vain, greedy, shallow, sly, cowardly, malignant,	  Was wayward, vain, greedy, shallow, sly, cowardly, malignant,
  The wolf, the snake, the hog, not wanting in me.	  The wolf, the snake, the hog, not wanting in me.	  The wolf, the snake, the hog, not wanting in me.	  The wolf, the snake, the hog, not wanting in me.
  The cheating look, the frivolous word, the adulterous wish, not wanting,	  The cheating look, the frivolous word, the adulterous wish, not wanting,	  The cheating look, the frivolous word, the adulterous wish, not wanting,	  The cheating look, the frivolous word, the adulterous wish, not wanting,
			
  Refusals, hates, postponements, meanness, laziness, none of these wanting,	  Refusals, hates, postponements, meanness, laziness, none of these wanting,	  Refusals, hates, postponements, meanness, laziness, none of these wanting,	  Refusals, hates, postponements, meanness, laziness, none of these wanting,
  Was one with the rest, the days and haps of the rest,	  Was one with the rest, the days and haps of the rest,	  Was one with the rest, the days and haps of the rest,	  Was one with the rest, the days and haps of the rest,
  Was call'd by my nighest name by clear loud voices of young men as	  Was call'd by my nighest name by clear loud voices of young men as	  Was call'd by my nighest name by clear loud voices of young men as	  Was call'd by my nighest name by clear loud voices of young men as
      they saw me approaching or passing,	      they saw me approaching or passing,	      they saw me approaching or passing,	      they saw me approaching or passing,
  Felt their arms on my neck as I stood, or the negligent leaning of	  Felt their arms on my neck as I stood, or the negligent leaning of	  Felt their arms on my neck as I stood, or the negligent leaning of	  Felt their arms on my neck as I stood, or the negligent leaning of
      their flesh against me as I sat,	      their flesh against me as I sat,	      their flesh against me as I sat,	      their flesh against me as I sat,
  Saw many I loved in the street or ferry-boat or public assembly, yet	  Saw many I loved in the street or ferry-boat or public assembly, yet	  Saw many I loved in the street or ferry-boat or public assembly, yet	  Saw many I loved in the street or ferry-boat or public assembly, yet
      never told them a word,	      never told them a word,	      never told them a word,	      never told them a word,
  Lived the same life with the rest, the same old laughing, gnawing, sleeping,	  Lived the same life with the rest, the same old laughing, gnawing, sleeping,	  Lived the same life with the rest, the same old laughing, gnawing, sleeping,	  Lived the same life with the rest, the same old laughing, gnawing, sleeping,
  Play'd the part that still looks back on the actor or actress,	  Play'd the part that still looks back on the actor or actress,	  Play'd the part that still looks back on the actor or actress,	  Play'd the part that still looks back on the actor or actress,
  The same old role, the role that is what we make it, as great as we like,	  The same old role, the role that is what we make it, as great as we like,	  The same old role, the role that is what we make it, as great as we like,	  The same old role, the role that is what we make it, as great as we like,
  Or as small as we like, or both great and small.	  Or as small as we like, or both great and small.	  Or as small as we like, or both great and small.	  Or as small as we like, or both great and small.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  Closer yet I approach you,	  Closer yet I approach you,	  Closer yet I approach you,	  Closer yet I approach you,
  What thought you have of me now, I had as much of you--I laid in my	  What thought you have of me now, I had as much of you--I laid in my	  What thought you have of me now, I had as much of you--I laid in my	  What thought you have of me now, I had as much of you--I laid in my
      stores in advance,	      stores in advance,	      stores in advance,	      stores in advance,
  I consider'd long and seriously of you before you were born.	  I consider'd long and seriously of you before you were born.	  I consider'd long and seriously of you before you were born.	  I consider'd long and seriously of you before you were born.
			
  Who was to know what should come home to me?	  Who was to know what should come home to me?	  Who was to know what should come home to me?	  Who was to know what should come home to me?
  Who knows but I am enjoying this?	  Who knows but I am enjoying this?	  Who knows but I am enjoying this?	  Who knows but I am enjoying this?
  Who knows, for all the distance, but I am as good as looking at you	  Who knows, for all the distance, but I am as good as looking at you	  Who knows, for all the distance, but I am as good as looking at you	  Who knows, for all the distance, but I am as good as looking at you
      now, for all you cannot see me?	      now, for all you cannot see me?	      now, for all you cannot see me?	      now, for all you cannot see me?
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  Ah, what can ever be more stately and admirable to me than	  Ah, what can ever be more stately and admirable to me than	  Ah, what can ever be more stately and admirable to me than	  Ah, what can ever be more stately and admirable to me than
      mast-hemm'd Manhattan?	      mast-hemm'd Manhattan?	      mast-hemm'd Manhattan?	      mast-hemm'd Manhattan?
  River and sunset and scallop-edg'd waves of flood-tide?	  River and sunset and scallop-edg'd waves of flood-tide?	  River and sunset and scallop-edg'd waves of flood-tide?	  River and sunset and scallop-edg'd waves of flood-tide?
  The sea-gulls oscillating their bodies, the hay-boat in the	  The sea-gulls oscillating their bodies, the hay-boat in the	  The sea-gulls oscillating their bodies, the hay-boat in the	  The sea-gulls oscillating their bodies, the hay-boat in the
      twilight, and the belated lighter?	      twilight, and the belated lighter?	      twilight, and the belated lighter?	      twilight, and the belated lighter?
  What gods can exceed these that clasp me by the hand, and with voices I	  What gods can exceed these that clasp me by the hand, and with voices I	  What gods can exceed these that clasp me by the hand, and with voices I	  What gods can exceed these that clasp me by the hand, and with voices I
      love call me promptly and loudly by my nighest name as approach?	      love call me promptly and loudly by my nighest name as approach?	      love call me promptly and loudly by my nighest name as approach?	      love call me promptly and loudly by my nighest name as approach?
  What is more subtle than this which ties me to the woman or man that	  What is more subtle than this which ties me to the woman or man that	  What is more subtle than this which ties me to the woman or man that	  What is more subtle than this which ties me to the woman or man that
      looks in my face?	      looks in my face?	      looks in my face?	      looks in my face?
  Which fuses me into you now, and pours my meaning into you?	  Which fuses me into you now, and pours my meaning into you?	  Which fuses me into you now, and pours my meaning into you?	  Which fuses me into you now, and pours my meaning into you?
			
  We understand then do we not?	  We understand then do we not?	  We understand then do we not?	  We understand then do we not?
  What I promis'd without mentioning it, have you not accepted?	  What I promis'd without mentioning it, have you not accepted?	  What I promis'd without mentioning it, have you not accepted?	  What I promis'd without mentioning it, have you not accepted?
  What the study could not teach--what the preaching could not	  What the study could not teach--what the preaching could not	  What the study could not teach--what the preaching could not	  What the study could not teach--what the preaching could not
      accomplish is accomplish'd, is it not?	      accomplish is accomplish'd, is it not?	      accomplish is accomplish'd, is it not?	      accomplish is accomplish'd, is it not?
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  Flow on, river! flow with the flood-tide, and ebb with the ebb-tide!	  Flow on, river! flow with the flood-tide, and ebb with the ebb-tide!	  Flow on, river! flow with the flood-tide, and ebb with the ebb-tide!	  Flow on, river! flow with the flood-tide, and ebb with the ebb-tide!
  Frolic on, crested and scallop-edg'd waves!	  Frolic on, crested and scallop-edg'd waves!	  Frolic on, crested and scallop-edg'd waves!	  Frolic on, crested and scallop-edg'd waves!
  Gorgeous clouds of the sunset! drench with your splendor me, or the	  Gorgeous clouds of the sunset! drench with your splendor me, or the	  Gorgeous clouds of the sunset! drench with your splendor me, or the	  Gorgeous clouds of the sunset! drench with your splendor me, or the
      men and women generations after me!	      men and women generations after me!	      men and women generations after me!	      men and women generations after me!
  Cross from shore to shore, countless crowds of passengers!	  Cross from shore to shore, countless crowds of passengers!	  Cross from shore to shore, countless crowds of passengers!	  Cross from shore to shore, countless crowds of passengers!
  Stand up, tall masts of Mannahatta! stand up, beautiful hills of Brooklyn!	  Stand up, tall masts of Mannahatta! stand up, beautiful hills of Brooklyn!	  Stand up, tall masts of Mannahatta! stand up, beautiful hills of Brooklyn!	  Stand up, tall masts of Mannahatta! stand up, beautiful hills of Brooklyn!
  Throb, baffled and curious brain! throw out questions and answers!	  Throb, baffled and curious brain! throw out questions and answers!	  Throb, baffled and curious brain! throw out questions and answers!	  Throb, baffled and curious brain! throw out questions and answers!
  Suspend here and everywhere, eternal float of solution!	  Suspend here and everywhere, eternal float of solution!	  Suspend here and everywhere, eternal float of solution!	  Suspend here and everywhere, eternal float of solution!
  Gaze, loving and thirsting eyes, in the house or street or public assembly!	  Gaze, loving and thirsting eyes, in the house or street or public assembly!	  Gaze, loving and thirsting eyes, in the house or street or public assembly!	  Gaze, loving and thirsting eyes, in the house or street or public assembly!
  Sound out, voices of young men! loudly and musically call me by my	  Sound out, voices of young men! loudly and musically call me by my	  Sound out, voices of young men! loudly and musically call me by my	  Sound out, voices of young men! loudly and musically call me by my
      nighest name!	      nighest name!	      nighest name!	      nighest name!
  Live, old life! play the part that looks back on the actor or actress!	  Live, old life! play the part that looks back on the actor or actress!	  Live, old life! play the part that looks back on the actor or actress!	  Live, old life! play the part that looks back on the actor or actress!
  Play the old role, the role that is great or small according as one	  Play the old role, the role that is great or small according as one	  Play the old role, the role that is great or small according as one	  Play the old role, the role that is great or small according as one
      makes it!	      makes it!	      makes it!	      makes it!
  Consider, you who peruse me, whether I may not in unknown ways be	  Consider, you who peruse me, whether I may not in unknown ways be	  Consider, you who peruse me, whether I may not in unknown ways be	  Consider, you who peruse me, whether I may not in unknown ways be
      looking upon you;	      looking upon you;	      looking upon you;	      looking upon you;
  Be firm, rail over the river, to support those who lean idly, yet	  Be firm, rail over the river, to support those who lean idly, yet	  Be firm, rail over the river, to support those who lean idly, yet	  Be firm, rail over the river, to support those who lean idly, yet
      haste with the hasting current;	      haste with the hasting current;	      haste with the hasting current;	      haste with the hasting current;
  Fly on, sea-birds! fly sideways, or wheel in large circles high in the air;	  Fly on, sea-birds! fly sideways, or wheel in large circles high in the air;	  Fly on, sea-birds! fly sideways, or wheel in large circles high in the air;	  Fly on, sea-birds! fly sideways, or wheel in large circles high in the air;
  Receive the summer sky, you water, and faithfully hold it till all	  Receive the summer sky, you water, and faithfully hold it till all	  Receive the summer sky, you water, and faithfully hold it till all	  Receive the summer sky, you water, and faithfully hold it till all
      downcast eyes have time to take it from you!	      downcast eyes have time to take it from you!	      downcast eyes have time to take it from you!	      downcast eyes have time to take it from you!
  Diverge, fine spokes of light, from the shape of my head, or any	  Diverge, fine spokes of light, from the shape of my head, or any	  Diverge, fine spokes of light, from the shape of my head, or any	  Diverge, fine spokes of light, from the shape of my head, or any
      one's head, in the sunlit water!	      one's head, in the sunlit water!	      one's head, in the sunlit water!	      one's head, in the sunlit water!
  Come on, ships from the lower bay! pass up or down, white-sail'd	  Come on, ships from the lower bay! pass up or down, white-sail'd	  Come on, ships from the lower bay! pass up or down, white-sail'd	  Come on, ships from the lower bay! pass up or down, white-sail'd
      schooners, sloops, lighters!	      schooners, sloops, lighters!	      schooners, sloops, lighters!	      schooners, sloops, lighters!
  Flaunt away, flags of all nations! be duly lower'd at sunset!	  Flaunt away, flags of all nations! be duly lower'd at sunset!	  Flaunt away, flags of all nations! be duly lower'd at sunset!	  Flaunt away, flags of all nations! be duly lower'd at sunset!
  Burn high your fires, foundry chimneys! cast black shadows at	  Burn high your fires, foundry chimneys! cast black shadows at	  Burn high your fires, foundry chimneys! cast black shadows at	  Burn high your fires, foundry chimneys! cast black shadows at
      nightfall! cast red and yellow light over the tops of the houses!	      nightfall! cast red and yellow light over the tops of the houses!	      nightfall! cast red and yellow light over the tops of the houses!	      nightfall! cast red and yellow light over the tops of the houses!
  Appearances, now or henceforth, indicate what you are,	  Appearances, now or henceforth, indicate what you are,	  Appearances, now or henceforth, indicate what you are,	  Appearances, now or henceforth, indicate what you are,
  You necessary film, continue to envelop the soul,	  You necessary film, continue to envelop the soul,	  You necessary film, continue to envelop the soul,	  You necessary film, continue to envelop the soul,
  About my body for me, and your body for you, be hung our divinest aromas,	  About my body for me, and your body for you, be hung our divinest aromas,	  About my body for me, and your body for you, be hung our divinest aromas,	  About my body for me, and your body for you, be hung our divinest aromas,
  Thrive, cities--bring your freight, bring your shows, ample and	  Thrive, cities--bring your freight, bring your shows, ample and	  Thrive, cities--bring your freight, bring your shows, ample and	  Thrive, cities--bring your freight, bring your shows, ample and
      sufficient rivers,	      sufficient rivers,	      sufficient rivers,	      sufficient rivers,
  Expand, being than which none else is perhaps more spiritual,	  Expand, being than which none else is perhaps more spiritual,	  Expand, being than which none else is perhaps more spiritual,	  Expand, being than which none else is perhaps more spiritual,
  Keep your places, objects than which none else is more lasting.	  Keep your places, objects than which none else is more lasting.	  Keep your places, objects than which none else is more lasting.	  Keep your places, objects than which none else is more lasting.
			
  You have waited, you always wait, you dumb, beautiful ministers,	  You have waited, you always wait, you dumb, beautiful ministers,	  You have waited, you always wait, you dumb, beautiful ministers,	  You have waited, you always wait, you dumb, beautiful ministers,
  We receive you with free sense at last, and are insatiate henceforward,	  We receive you with free sense at last, and are insatiate henceforward,	  We receive you with free sense at last, and are insatiate henceforward,	  We receive you with free sense at last, and are insatiate henceforward,
  Not you any more shall be able to foil us, or withhold yourselves from us,	  Not you any more shall be able to foil us, or withhold yourselves from us,	  Not you any more shall be able to foil us, or withhold yourselves from us,	  Not you any more shall be able to foil us, or withhold yourselves from us,
  We use you, and do not cast you aside--we plant you permanently within us,	  We use you, and do not cast you aside--we plant you permanently within us,	  We use you, and do not cast you aside--we plant you permanently within us,	  We use you, and do not cast you aside--we plant you permanently within us,
  We fathom you not--we love you--there is perfection in you also,	  We fathom you not--we love you--there is perfection in you also,	  We fathom you not--we love you--there is perfection in you also,	  We fathom you not--we love you--there is perfection in you also,
  You furnish your parts toward eternity,	  You furnish your parts toward eternity,	  You furnish your parts toward eternity,	  You furnish your parts toward eternity,
  Great or small, you furnish your parts toward the soul.	  Great or small, you furnish your parts toward the soul.	  Great or small, you furnish your parts toward the soul.	  Great or small, you furnish your parts toward the soul.
			
			
			
			
BOOK IX	BOOK IX	BOOK IX	BOOK IX
			
			
Song of the Answerer	Song of the Answerer	Song of the Answerer	Song of the Answerer
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Now list to my morning's romanza, I tell the signs of the Answerer,	  Now list to my morning's romanza, I tell the signs of the Answerer,	  Now list to my morning's romanza, I tell the signs of the Answerer,	  Now list to my morning's romanza, I tell the signs of the Answerer,
  To the cities and farms I sing as they spread in the sunshine before me.	  To the cities and farms I sing as they spread in the sunshine before me.	  To the cities and farms I sing as they spread in the sunshine before me.	  To the cities and farms I sing as they spread in the sunshine before me.
			
  A young man comes to me bearing a message from his brother,	  A young man comes to me bearing a message from his brother,	  A young man comes to me bearing a message from his brother,	  A young man comes to me bearing a message from his brother,
  How shall the young man know the whether and when of his brother?	  How shall the young man know the whether and when of his brother?	  How shall the young man know the whether and when of his brother?	  How shall the young man know the whether and when of his brother?
  Tell him to send me the signs. And I stand before the young man	  Tell him to send me the signs. And I stand before the young man	  Tell him to send me the signs. And I stand before the young man	  Tell him to send me the signs. And I stand before the young man
      face to face, and take his right hand in my left hand and his	      face to face, and take his right hand in my left hand and his	      face to face, and take his right hand in my left hand and his	      face to face, and take his right hand in my left hand and his
      left hand in my right hand,	      left hand in my right hand,	      left hand in my right hand,	      left hand in my right hand,
  And I answer for his brother and for men, and I answer for him that	  And I answer for his brother and for men, and I answer for him that	  And I answer for his brother and for men, and I answer for him that	  And I answer for his brother and for men, and I answer for him that
      answers for all, and send these signs.	      answers for all, and send these signs.	      answers for all, and send these signs.	      answers for all, and send these signs.
			
  Him all wait for, him all yield up to, his word is decisive and final,	  Him all wait for, him all yield up to, his word is decisive and final,	  Him all wait for, him all yield up to, his word is decisive and final,	  Him all wait for, him all yield up to, his word is decisive and final,
  Him they accept, in him lave, in him perceive themselves as amid light,	  Him they accept, in him lave, in him perceive themselves as amid light,	  Him they accept, in him lave, in him perceive themselves as amid light,	  Him they accept, in him lave, in him perceive themselves as amid light,
  Him they immerse and he immerses them.	  Him they immerse and he immerses them.	  Him they immerse and he immerses them.	  Him they immerse and he immerses them.
			
  Beautiful women, the haughtiest nations, laws, the landscape,	  Beautiful women, the haughtiest nations, laws, the landscape,	  Beautiful women, the haughtiest nations, laws, the landscape,	  Beautiful women, the haughtiest nations, laws, the landscape,
      people, animals,	      people, animals,	      people, animals,	      people, animals,
  The profound earth and its attributes and the unquiet ocean, (so	  The profound earth and its attributes and the unquiet ocean, (so	  The profound earth and its attributes and the unquiet ocean, (so	  The profound earth and its attributes and the unquiet ocean, (so
      tell I my morning's romanza,)	      tell I my morning's romanza,)	      tell I my morning's romanza,)	      tell I my morning's romanza,)
  All enjoyments and properties and money, and whatever money will buy,	  All enjoyments and properties and money, and whatever money will buy,	  All enjoyments and properties and money, and whatever money will buy,	  All enjoyments and properties and money, and whatever money will buy,
  The best farms, others toiling and planting and he unavoidably reaps,	  The best farms, others toiling and planting and he unavoidably reaps,	  The best farms, others toiling and planting and he unavoidably reaps,	  The best farms, others toiling and planting and he unavoidably reaps,
  The noblest and costliest cities, others grading and building and he	  The noblest and costliest cities, others grading and building and he	  The noblest and costliest cities, others grading and building and he	  The noblest and costliest cities, others grading and building and he
      domiciles there,	      domiciles there,	      domiciles there,	      domiciles there,
  Nothing for any one but what is for him, near and far are for him,	  Nothing for any one but what is for him, near and far are for him,	  Nothing for any one but what is for him, near and far are for him,	  Nothing for any one but what is for him, near and far are for him,
      the ships in the offing,	      the ships in the offing,	      the ships in the offing,	      the ships in the offing,
  The perpetual shows and marches on land are for him if they are for anybody.	  The perpetual shows and marches on land are for him if they are for anybody.	  The perpetual shows and marches on land are for him if they are for anybody.	  The perpetual shows and marches on land are for him if they are for anybody.
			
  He puts things in their attitudes,	  He puts things in their attitudes,	  He puts things in their attitudes,	  He puts things in their attitudes,
  He puts to-day out of himself with plasticity and love,	  He puts to-day out of himself with plasticity and love,	  He puts to-day out of himself with plasticity and love,	  He puts to-day out of himself with plasticity and love,
  He places his own times, reminiscences, parents, brothers and	  He places his own times, reminiscences, parents, brothers and	  He places his own times, reminiscences, parents, brothers and	  He places his own times, reminiscences, parents, brothers and
      sisters, associations, employment, politics, so that the rest	      sisters, associations, employment, politics, so that the rest	      sisters, associations, employment, politics, so that the rest	      sisters, associations, employment, politics, so that the rest
      never shame them afterward, nor assume to command them.	      never shame them afterward, nor assume to command them.	      never shame them afterward, nor assume to command them.	      never shame them afterward, nor assume to command them.
			
  He is the Answerer,	  He is the Answerer,	  He is the Answerer,	  He is the Answerer,
  What can be answer'd he answers, and what cannot be answer'd he	  What can be answer'd he answers, and what cannot be answer'd he	  What can be answer'd he answers, and what cannot be answer'd he	  What can be answer'd he answers, and what cannot be answer'd he
      shows how it cannot be answer'd.	      shows how it cannot be answer'd.	      shows how it cannot be answer'd.	      shows how it cannot be answer'd.
			
  A man is a summons and challenge,	  A man is a summons and challenge,	  A man is a summons and challenge,	  A man is a summons and challenge,
  (It is vain to skulk--do you hear that mocking and laughter? do you	  (It is vain to skulk--do you hear that mocking and laughter? do you	  (It is vain to skulk--do you hear that mocking and laughter? do you	  (It is vain to skulk--do you hear that mocking and laughter? do you
      hear the ironical echoes?)	      hear the ironical echoes?)	      hear the ironical echoes?)	      hear the ironical echoes?)
			
  Books, friendships, philosophers, priests, action, pleasure, pride,	  Books, friendships, philosophers, priests, action, pleasure, pride,	  Books, friendships, philosophers, priests, action, pleasure, pride,	  Books, friendships, philosophers, priests, action, pleasure, pride,
      beat up and down seeking to give satisfaction,	      beat up and down seeking to give satisfaction,	      beat up and down seeking to give satisfaction,	      beat up and down seeking to give satisfaction,
  He indicates the satisfaction, and indicates them that beat up and	  He indicates the satisfaction, and indicates them that beat up and	  He indicates the satisfaction, and indicates them that beat up and	  He indicates the satisfaction, and indicates them that beat up and
      down also.	      down also.	      down also.	      down also.
			
  Whichever the sex, whatever the season or place, he may go freshly	  Whichever the sex, whatever the season or place, he may go freshly	  Whichever the sex, whatever the season or place, he may go freshly	  Whichever the sex, whatever the season or place, he may go freshly
      and gently and safely by day or by night,	      and gently and safely by day or by night,	      and gently and safely by day or by night,	      and gently and safely by day or by night,
  He has the pass-key of hearts, to him the response of the prying of	  He has the pass-key of hearts, to him the response of the prying of	  He has the pass-key of hearts, to him the response of the prying of	  He has the pass-key of hearts, to him the response of the prying of
      hands on the knobs.	      hands on the knobs.	      hands on the knobs.	      hands on the knobs.
			
  His welcome is universal, the flow of beauty is not more welcome or	  His welcome is universal, the flow of beauty is not more welcome or	  His welcome is universal, the flow of beauty is not more welcome or	  His welcome is universal, the flow of beauty is not more welcome or
      universal than he is,	      universal than he is,	      universal than he is,	      universal than he is,
  The person he favors by day or sleeps with at night is blessed.	  The person he favors by day or sleeps with at night is blessed.	  The person he favors by day or sleeps with at night is blessed.	  The person he favors by day or sleeps with at night is blessed.
			
  Every existence has its idiom, every thing has an idiom and tongue,	  Every existence has its idiom, every thing has an idiom and tongue,	  Every existence has its idiom, every thing has an idiom and tongue,	  Every existence has its idiom, every thing has an idiom and tongue,
  He resolves all tongues into his own and bestows it upon men, and	  He resolves all tongues into his own and bestows it upon men, and	  He resolves all tongues into his own and bestows it upon men, and	  He resolves all tongues into his own and bestows it upon men, and
      any man translates, and any man translates himself also,	      any man translates, and any man translates himself also,	      any man translates, and any man translates himself also,	      any man translates, and any man translates himself also,
  One part does not counteract another part, he is the joiner, he sees	  One part does not counteract another part, he is the joiner, he sees	  One part does not counteract another part, he is the joiner, he sees	  One part does not counteract another part, he is the joiner, he sees
      how they join.	      how they join.	      how they join.	      how they join.
			
  He says indifferently and alike How are you friend? to the President	  He says indifferently and alike How are you friend? to the President	  He says indifferently and alike How are you friend? to the President	  He says indifferently and alike How are you friend? to the President
      at his levee,	      at his levee,	      at his levee,	      at his levee,
  And he says Good-day my brother, to Cudge that hoes in the sugar-field,	  And he says Good-day my brother, to Cudge that hoes in the sugar-field,	  And he says Good-day my brother, to Cudge that hoes in the sugar-field,	  And he says Good-day my brother, to Cudge that hoes in the sugar-field,
  And both understand him and know that his speech is right.	  And both understand him and know that his speech is right.	  And both understand him and know that his speech is right.	  And both understand him and know that his speech is right.
			
  He walks with perfect ease in the capitol,	  He walks with perfect ease in the capitol,	  He walks with perfect ease in the capitol,	  He walks with perfect ease in the capitol,
  He walks among the Congress, and one Representative says to another,	  He walks among the Congress, and one Representative says to another,	  He walks among the Congress, and one Representative says to another,	  He walks among the Congress, and one Representative says to another,
      Here is our equal appearing and new.	      Here is our equal appearing and new.	      Here is our equal appearing and new.	      Here is our equal appearing and new.
			
  Then the mechanics take him for a mechanic,	  Then the mechanics take him for a mechanic,	  Then the mechanics take him for a mechanic,	  Then the mechanics take him for a mechanic,
  And the soldiers suppose him to be a soldier, and the sailors that	  And the soldiers suppose him to be a soldier, and the sailors that	  And the soldiers suppose him to be a soldier, and the sailors that	  And the soldiers suppose him to be a soldier, and the sailors that
      he has follow'd the sea,	      he has follow'd the sea,	      he has follow'd the sea,	      he has follow'd the sea,
  And the authors take him for an author, and the artists for an artist,	  And the authors take him for an author, and the artists for an artist,	  And the authors take him for an author, and the artists for an artist,	  And the authors take him for an author, and the artists for an artist,
  And the laborers perceive he could labor with them and love them,	  And the laborers perceive he could labor with them and love them,	  And the laborers perceive he could labor with them and love them,	  And the laborers perceive he could labor with them and love them,
  No matter what the work is, that he is the one to follow it or has	  No matter what the work is, that he is the one to follow it or has	  No matter what the work is, that he is the one to follow it or has	  No matter what the work is, that he is the one to follow it or has
      follow'd it,	      follow'd it,	      follow'd it,	      follow'd it,
  No matter what the nation, that he might find his brothers and	  No matter what the nation, that he might find his brothers and	  No matter what the nation, that he might find his brothers and	  No matter what the nation, that he might find his brothers and
      sisters there.	      sisters there.	      sisters there.	      sisters there.
			
  The English believe he comes of their English stock,	  The English believe he comes of their English stock,	  The English believe he comes of their English stock,	  The English believe he comes of their English stock,
  A Jew to the Jew he seems, a Russ to the Russ, usual and near,	  A Jew to the Jew he seems, a Russ to the Russ, usual and near,	  A Jew to the Jew he seems, a Russ to the Russ, usual and near,	  A Jew to the Jew he seems, a Russ to the Russ, usual and near,
      removed from none.	      removed from none.	      removed from none.	      removed from none.
			
  Whoever he looks at in the traveler's coffee-house claims him,	  Whoever he looks at in the traveler's coffee-house claims him,	  Whoever he looks at in the traveler's coffee-house claims him,	  Whoever he looks at in the traveler's coffee-house claims him,
  The Italian or Frenchman is sure, the German is sure, the Spaniard	  The Italian or Frenchman is sure, the German is sure, the Spaniard	  The Italian or Frenchman is sure, the German is sure, the Spaniard	  The Italian or Frenchman is sure, the German is sure, the Spaniard
      is sure, and the island Cuban is sure,	      is sure, and the island Cuban is sure,	      is sure, and the island Cuban is sure,	      is sure, and the island Cuban is sure,
  The engineer, the deck-hand on the great lakes, or on the Mississippi	  The engineer, the deck-hand on the great lakes, or on the Mississippi	  The engineer, the deck-hand on the great lakes, or on the Mississippi	  The engineer, the deck-hand on the great lakes, or on the Mississippi
      or St. Lawrence or Sacramento, or Hudson or Paumanok sound, claims him.	      or St. Lawrence or Sacramento, or Hudson or Paumanok sound, claims him.	      or St. Lawrence or Sacramento, or Hudson or Paumanok sound, claims him.	      or St. Lawrence or Sacramento, or Hudson or Paumanok sound, claims him.
			
  The gentleman of perfect blood acknowledges his perfect blood,	  The gentleman of perfect blood acknowledges his perfect blood,	  The gentleman of perfect blood acknowledges his perfect blood,	  The gentleman of perfect blood acknowledges his perfect blood,
  The insulter, the prostitute, the angry person, the beggar, see	  The insulter, the prostitute, the angry person, the beggar, see	  The insulter, the prostitute, the angry person, the beggar, see	  The insulter, the prostitute, the angry person, the beggar, see
      themselves in the ways of him, he strangely transmutes them,	      themselves in the ways of him, he strangely transmutes them,	      themselves in the ways of him, he strangely transmutes them,	      themselves in the ways of him, he strangely transmutes them,
  They are not vile any more, they hardly know themselves they are so grown.	  They are not vile any more, they hardly know themselves they are so grown.	  They are not vile any more, they hardly know themselves they are so grown.	  They are not vile any more, they hardly know themselves they are so grown.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  The indications and tally of time,	  The indications and tally of time,	  The indications and tally of time,	  The indications and tally of time,
  Perfect sanity shows the master among philosophs,	  Perfect sanity shows the master among philosophs,	  Perfect sanity shows the master among philosophs,	  Perfect sanity shows the master among philosophs,
  Time, always without break, indicates itself in parts,	  Time, always without break, indicates itself in parts,	  Time, always without break, indicates itself in parts,	  Time, always without break, indicates itself in parts,
  What always indicates the poet is the crowd of the pleasant company	  What always indicates the poet is the crowd of the pleasant company	  What always indicates the poet is the crowd of the pleasant company	  What always indicates the poet is the crowd of the pleasant company
      of singers, and their words,	      of singers, and their words,	      of singers, and their words,	      of singers, and their words,
  The words of the singers are the hours or minutes of the light or dark,	  The words of the singers are the hours or minutes of the light or dark,	  The words of the singers are the hours or minutes of the light or dark,	  The words of the singers are the hours or minutes of the light or dark,
      but the words of the maker of poems are the general light and dark,	      but the words of the maker of poems are the general light and dark,	      but the words of the maker of poems are the general light and dark,	      but the words of the maker of poems are the general light and dark,
  The maker of poems settles justice, reality, immortality,	  The maker of poems settles justice, reality, immortality,	  The maker of poems settles justice, reality, immortality,	  The maker of poems settles justice, reality, immortality,
  His insight and power encircle things and the human race,	  His insight and power encircle things and the human race,	  His insight and power encircle things and the human race,	  His insight and power encircle things and the human race,
  He is the glory and extract thus far of things and of the human race.	  He is the glory and extract thus far of things and of the human race.	  He is the glory and extract thus far of things and of the human race.	  He is the glory and extract thus far of things and of the human race.
			
  The singers do not beget, only the Poet begets,	  The singers do not beget, only the Poet begets,	  The singers do not beget, only the Poet begets,	  The singers do not beget, only the Poet begets,
  The singers are welcom'd, understood, appear often enough, but rare	  The singers are welcom'd, understood, appear often enough, but rare	  The singers are welcom'd, understood, appear often enough, but rare	  The singers are welcom'd, understood, appear often enough, but rare
      has the day been, likewise the spot, of the birth of the maker	      has the day been, likewise the spot, of the birth of the maker	      has the day been, likewise the spot, of the birth of the maker	      has the day been, likewise the spot, of the birth of the maker
      of poems, the Answerer,	      of poems, the Answerer,	      of poems, the Answerer,	      of poems, the Answerer,
  (Not every century nor every five centuries has contain'd such a	  (Not every century nor every five centuries has contain'd such a	  (Not every century nor every five centuries has contain'd such a	  (Not every century nor every five centuries has contain'd such a
      day, for all its names.)	      day, for all its names.)	      day, for all its names.)	      day, for all its names.)
			
  The singers of successive hours of centuries may have ostensible	  The singers of successive hours of centuries may have ostensible	  The singers of successive hours of centuries may have ostensible	  The singers of successive hours of centuries may have ostensible
      names, but the name of each of them is one of the singers,	      names, but the name of each of them is one of the singers,	      names, but the name of each of them is one of the singers,	      names, but the name of each of them is one of the singers,
  The name of each is, eye-singer, ear-singer, head-singer,	  The name of each is, eye-singer, ear-singer, head-singer,	  The name of each is, eye-singer, ear-singer, head-singer,	  The name of each is, eye-singer, ear-singer, head-singer,
      sweet-singer, night-singer, parlor-singer, love-singer,	      sweet-singer, night-singer, parlor-singer, love-singer,	      sweet-singer, night-singer, parlor-singer, love-singer,	      sweet-singer, night-singer, parlor-singer, love-singer,
      weird-singer, or something else.	      weird-singer, or something else.	      weird-singer, or something else.	      weird-singer, or something else.
			
  All this time and at all times wait the words of true poems,	  All this time and at all times wait the words of true poems,	  All this time and at all times wait the words of true poems,	  All this time and at all times wait the words of true poems,
  The words of true poems do not merely please,	  The words of true poems do not merely please,	  The words of true poems do not merely please,	  The words of true poems do not merely please,
  The true poets are not followers of beauty but the august masters of beauty;	  The true poets are not followers of beauty but the august masters of beauty;	  The true poets are not followers of beauty but the august masters of beauty;	  The true poets are not followers of beauty but the august masters of beauty;
  The greatness of sons is the exuding of the greatness of mothers	  The greatness of sons is the exuding of the greatness of mothers	  The greatness of sons is the exuding of the greatness of mothers	  The greatness of sons is the exuding of the greatness of mothers
      and fathers,	      and fathers,	      and fathers,	      and fathers,
  The words of true poems are the tuft and final applause of science.	  The words of true poems are the tuft and final applause of science.	  The words of true poems are the tuft and final applause of science.	  The words of true poems are the tuft and final applause of science.
			
  Divine instinct, breadth of vision, the law of reason, health,	  Divine instinct, breadth of vision, the law of reason, health,	  Divine instinct, breadth of vision, the law of reason, health,	  Divine instinct, breadth of vision, the law of reason, health,
      rudeness of body, withdrawnness,	      rudeness of body, withdrawnness,	      rudeness of body, withdrawnness,	      rudeness of body, withdrawnness,
  Gayety, sun-tan, air-sweetness, such are some of the words of poems.	  Gayety, sun-tan, air-sweetness, such are some of the words of poems.	  Gayety, sun-tan, air-sweetness, such are some of the words of poems.	  Gayety, sun-tan, air-sweetness, such are some of the words of poems.
			
  The sailor and traveler underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer,	  The sailor and traveler underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer,	  The sailor and traveler underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer,	  The sailor and traveler underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer,
  The builder, geometer, chemist, anatomist, phrenologist, artist, all	  The builder, geometer, chemist, anatomist, phrenologist, artist, all	  The builder, geometer, chemist, anatomist, phrenologist, artist, all	  The builder, geometer, chemist, anatomist, phrenologist, artist, all
      these underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer.	      these underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer.	      these underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer.	      these underlie the maker of poems, the Answerer.
			
  The words of the true poems give you more than poems,	  The words of the true poems give you more than poems,	  The words of the true poems give you more than poems,	  The words of the true poems give you more than poems,
  They give you to form for yourself poems, religions, politics, war,	  They give you to form for yourself poems, religions, politics, war,	  They give you to form for yourself poems, religions, politics, war,	  They give you to form for yourself poems, religions, politics, war,
      peace, behavior, histories, essays, daily life, and every thing else,	      peace, behavior, histories, essays, daily life, and every thing else,	      peace, behavior, histories, essays, daily life, and every thing else,	      peace, behavior, histories, essays, daily life, and every thing else,
  They balance ranks, colors, races, creeds, and the sexes,	  They balance ranks, colors, races, creeds, and the sexes,	  They balance ranks, colors, races, creeds, and the sexes,	  They balance ranks, colors, races, creeds, and the sexes,
  They do not seek beauty, they are sought,	  They do not seek beauty, they are sought,	  They do not seek beauty, they are sought,	  They do not seek beauty, they are sought,
  Forever touching them or close upon them follows beauty, longing,	  Forever touching them or close upon them follows beauty, longing,	  Forever touching them or close upon them follows beauty, longing,	  Forever touching them or close upon them follows beauty, longing,
      fain, love-sick.	      fain, love-sick.	      fain, love-sick.	      fain, love-sick.
			
  They prepare for death, yet are they not the finish, but rather the outset,	  They prepare for death, yet are they not the finish, but rather the outset,	  They prepare for death, yet are they not the finish, but rather the outset,	  They prepare for death, yet are they not the finish, but rather the outset,
  They bring none to his or her terminus or to be content and full,	  They bring none to his or her terminus or to be content and full,	  They bring none to his or her terminus or to be content and full,	  They bring none to his or her terminus or to be content and full,
  Whom they take they take into space to behold the birth of stars, to	  Whom they take they take into space to behold the birth of stars, to	  Whom they take they take into space to behold the birth of stars, to	  Whom they take they take into space to behold the birth of stars, to
      learn one of the meanings,	      learn one of the meanings,	      learn one of the meanings,	      learn one of the meanings,
  To launch off with absolute faith, to sweep through the ceaseless	  To launch off with absolute faith, to sweep through the ceaseless	  To launch off with absolute faith, to sweep through the ceaseless	  To launch off with absolute faith, to sweep through the ceaseless
      rings and never be quiet again.	      rings and never be quiet again.	      rings and never be quiet again.	      rings and never be quiet again.
			
			
			
			
BOOK X	BOOK X	BOOK X	BOOK X
			
			
Our Old Feuillage	Our Old Feuillage	Our Old Feuillage	Our Old Feuillage
			
  Always our old feuillage!	  Always our old feuillage!	  Always our old feuillage!	  Always our old feuillage!
  Always Florida's green peninsula--always the priceless delta of	  Always Florida's green peninsula--always the priceless delta of	  Always Florida's green peninsula--always the priceless delta of	  Always Florida's green peninsula--always the priceless delta of
      Louisiana--always the cotton-fields of Alabama and Texas,	      Louisiana--always the cotton-fields of Alabama and Texas,	      Louisiana--always the cotton-fields of Alabama and Texas,	      Louisiana--always the cotton-fields of Alabama and Texas,
  Always California's golden hills and hollows, and the silver	  Always California's golden hills and hollows, and the silver	  Always California's golden hills and hollows, and the silver	  Always California's golden hills and hollows, and the silver
      mountains of New Mexico--always soft-breath'd Cuba,	      mountains of New Mexico--always soft-breath'd Cuba,	      mountains of New Mexico--always soft-breath'd Cuba,	      mountains of New Mexico--always soft-breath'd Cuba,
  Always the vast slope drain'd by the Southern sea, inseparable with	  Always the vast slope drain'd by the Southern sea, inseparable with	  Always the vast slope drain'd by the Southern sea, inseparable with	  Always the vast slope drain'd by the Southern sea, inseparable with
      the slopes drain'd by the Eastern and Western seas,	      the slopes drain'd by the Eastern and Western seas,	      the slopes drain'd by the Eastern and Western seas,	      the slopes drain'd by the Eastern and Western seas,
  The area the eighty-third year of these States, the three and a half	  The area the eighty-third year of these States, the three and a half	  The area the eighty-third year of these States, the three and a half	  The area the eighty-third year of these States, the three and a half
      millions of square miles,	      millions of square miles,	      millions of square miles,	      millions of square miles,
  The eighteen thousand miles of sea-coast and bay-coast on the main,	  The eighteen thousand miles of sea-coast and bay-coast on the main,	  The eighteen thousand miles of sea-coast and bay-coast on the main,	  The eighteen thousand miles of sea-coast and bay-coast on the main,
      the thirty thousand miles of river navigation,	      the thirty thousand miles of river navigation,	      the thirty thousand miles of river navigation,	      the thirty thousand miles of river navigation,
  The seven millions of distinct families and the same number of dwellings--	  The seven millions of distinct families and the same number of dwellings--	  The seven millions of distinct families and the same number of dwellings--	  The seven millions of distinct families and the same number of dwellings--
      always these, and more, branching forth into numberless branches,	      always these, and more, branching forth into numberless branches,	      always these, and more, branching forth into numberless branches,	      always these, and more, branching forth into numberless branches,
  Always the free range and diversity--always the continent of Democracy;	  Always the free range and diversity--always the continent of Democracy;	  Always the free range and diversity--always the continent of Democracy;	  Always the free range and diversity--always the continent of Democracy;
  Always the prairies, pastures, forests, vast cities, travelers,	  Always the prairies, pastures, forests, vast cities, travelers,	  Always the prairies, pastures, forests, vast cities, travelers,	  Always the prairies, pastures, forests, vast cities, travelers,
      Kanada, the snows;	      Kanada, the snows;	      Kanada, the snows;	      Kanada, the snows;
  Always these compact lands tied at the hips with the belt stringing	  Always these compact lands tied at the hips with the belt stringing	  Always these compact lands tied at the hips with the belt stringing	  Always these compact lands tied at the hips with the belt stringing
      the huge oval lakes;	      the huge oval lakes;	      the huge oval lakes;	      the huge oval lakes;
  Always the West with strong native persons, the increasing density there,	  Always the West with strong native persons, the increasing density there,	  Always the West with strong native persons, the increasing density there,	  Always the West with strong native persons, the increasing density there,
      the habitans, friendly, threatening, ironical, scorning invaders;	      the habitans, friendly, threatening, ironical, scorning invaders;	      the habitans, friendly, threatening, ironical, scorning invaders;	      the habitans, friendly, threatening, ironical, scorning invaders;
  All sights, South, North, East--all deeds, promiscuously done at all times,	  All sights, South, North, East--all deeds, promiscuously done at all times,	  All sights, South, North, East--all deeds, promiscuously done at all times,	  All sights, South, North, East--all deeds, promiscuously done at all times,
  All characters, movements, growths, a few noticed, myriads unnoticed,	  All characters, movements, growths, a few noticed, myriads unnoticed,	  All characters, movements, growths, a few noticed, myriads unnoticed,	  All characters, movements, growths, a few noticed, myriads unnoticed,
  Through Mannahatta's streets I walking, these things gathering,	  Through Mannahatta's streets I walking, these things gathering,	  Through Mannahatta's streets I walking, these things gathering,	  Through Mannahatta's streets I walking, these things gathering,
  On interior rivers by night in the glare of pine knots, steamboats	  On interior rivers by night in the glare of pine knots, steamboats	  On interior rivers by night in the glare of pine knots, steamboats	  On interior rivers by night in the glare of pine knots, steamboats
      wooding up,	      wooding up,	      wooding up,	      wooding up,
  Sunlight by day on the valley of the Susquehanna, and on the valleys	  Sunlight by day on the valley of the Susquehanna, and on the valleys	  Sunlight by day on the valley of the Susquehanna, and on the valleys	  Sunlight by day on the valley of the Susquehanna, and on the valleys
      of the Potomac and Rappahannock, and the valleys of the Roanoke	      of the Potomac and Rappahannock, and the valleys of the Roanoke	      of the Potomac and Rappahannock, and the valleys of the Roanoke	      of the Potomac and Rappahannock, and the valleys of the Roanoke
      and Delaware,	      and Delaware,	      and Delaware,	      and Delaware,
  In their northerly wilds beasts of prey haunting the Adirondacks the	  In their northerly wilds beasts of prey haunting the Adirondacks the	  In their northerly wilds beasts of prey haunting the Adirondacks the	  In their northerly wilds beasts of prey haunting the Adirondacks the
      hills, or lapping the Saginaw waters to drink,	      hills, or lapping the Saginaw waters to drink,	      hills, or lapping the Saginaw waters to drink,	      hills, or lapping the Saginaw waters to drink,
  In a lonesome inlet a sheldrake lost from the flock, sitting on the	  In a lonesome inlet a sheldrake lost from the flock, sitting on the	  In a lonesome inlet a sheldrake lost from the flock, sitting on the	  In a lonesome inlet a sheldrake lost from the flock, sitting on the
      water rocking silently,	      water rocking silently,	      water rocking silently,	      water rocking silently,
  In farmers' barns oxen in the stable, their harvest labor done, they	  In farmers' barns oxen in the stable, their harvest labor done, they	  In farmers' barns oxen in the stable, their harvest labor done, they	  In farmers' barns oxen in the stable, their harvest labor done, they
      rest standing, they are too tired,	      rest standing, they are too tired,	      rest standing, they are too tired,	      rest standing, they are too tired,
  Afar on arctic ice the she-walrus lying drowsily while her cubs play around,	  Afar on arctic ice the she-walrus lying drowsily while her cubs play around,	  Afar on arctic ice the she-walrus lying drowsily while her cubs play around,	  Afar on arctic ice the she-walrus lying drowsily while her cubs play around,
  The hawk sailing where men have not yet sail'd, the farthest polar	  The hawk sailing where men have not yet sail'd, the farthest polar	  The hawk sailing where men have not yet sail'd, the farthest polar	  The hawk sailing where men have not yet sail'd, the farthest polar
      sea, ripply, crystalline, open, beyond the floes,	      sea, ripply, crystalline, open, beyond the floes,	      sea, ripply, crystalline, open, beyond the floes,	      sea, ripply, crystalline, open, beyond the floes,
  White drift spooning ahead where the ship in the tempest dashes,	  White drift spooning ahead where the ship in the tempest dashes,	  White drift spooning ahead where the ship in the tempest dashes,	  White drift spooning ahead where the ship in the tempest dashes,
  On solid land what is done in cities as the bells strike midnight together,	  On solid land what is done in cities as the bells strike midnight together,	  On solid land what is done in cities as the bells strike midnight together,	  On solid land what is done in cities as the bells strike midnight together,
  In primitive woods the sounds there also sounding, the howl of the	  In primitive woods the sounds there also sounding, the howl of the	  In primitive woods the sounds there also sounding, the howl of the	  In primitive woods the sounds there also sounding, the howl of the
      wolf, the scream of the panther, and the hoarse bellow of the elk,	      wolf, the scream of the panther, and the hoarse bellow of the elk,	      wolf, the scream of the panther, and the hoarse bellow of the elk,	      wolf, the scream of the panther, and the hoarse bellow of the elk,
  In winter beneath the hard blue ice of Moosehead lake, in summer	  In winter beneath the hard blue ice of Moosehead lake, in summer	  In winter beneath the hard blue ice of Moosehead lake, in summer	  In winter beneath the hard blue ice of Moosehead lake, in summer
      visible through the clear waters, the great trout swimming,	      visible through the clear waters, the great trout swimming,	      visible through the clear waters, the great trout swimming,	      visible through the clear waters, the great trout swimming,
  In lower latitudes in warmer air in the Carolinas the large black	  In lower latitudes in warmer air in the Carolinas the large black	  In lower latitudes in warmer air in the Carolinas the large black	  In lower latitudes in warmer air in the Carolinas the large black
      buzzard floating slowly high beyond the tree tops,	      buzzard floating slowly high beyond the tree tops,	      buzzard floating slowly high beyond the tree tops,	      buzzard floating slowly high beyond the tree tops,
  Below, the red cedar festoon'd with tylandria, the pines and	  Below, the red cedar festoon'd with tylandria, the pines and	  Below, the red cedar festoon'd with tylandria, the pines and	  Below, the red cedar festoon'd with tylandria, the pines and
      cypresses growing out of the white sand that spreads far and flat,	      cypresses growing out of the white sand that spreads far and flat,	      cypresses growing out of the white sand that spreads far and flat,	      cypresses growing out of the white sand that spreads far and flat,
  Rude boats descending the big Pedee, climbing plants, parasites with	  Rude boats descending the big Pedee, climbing plants, parasites with	  Rude boats descending the big Pedee, climbing plants, parasites with	  Rude boats descending the big Pedee, climbing plants, parasites with
      color'd flowers and berries enveloping huge trees,	      color'd flowers and berries enveloping huge trees,	      color'd flowers and berries enveloping huge trees,	      color'd flowers and berries enveloping huge trees,
  The waving drapery on the live-oak trailing long and low,	  The waving drapery on the live-oak trailing long and low,	  The waving drapery on the live-oak trailing long and low,	  The waving drapery on the live-oak trailing long and low,
      noiselessly waved by the wind,	      noiselessly waved by the wind,	      noiselessly waved by the wind,	      noiselessly waved by the wind,
  The camp of Georgia wagoners just after dark, the supper-fires and	  The camp of Georgia wagoners just after dark, the supper-fires and	  The camp of Georgia wagoners just after dark, the supper-fires and	  The camp of Georgia wagoners just after dark, the supper-fires and
      the cooking and eating by whites and negroes,	      the cooking and eating by whites and negroes,	      the cooking and eating by whites and negroes,	      the cooking and eating by whites and negroes,
  Thirty or forty great wagons, the mules, cattle, horses, feeding	  Thirty or forty great wagons, the mules, cattle, horses, feeding	  Thirty or forty great wagons, the mules, cattle, horses, feeding	  Thirty or forty great wagons, the mules, cattle, horses, feeding
      from troughs,	      from troughs,	      from troughs,	      from troughs,
  The shadows, gleams, up under the leaves of the old sycamore-trees,	  The shadows, gleams, up under the leaves of the old sycamore-trees,	  The shadows, gleams, up under the leaves of the old sycamore-trees,	  The shadows, gleams, up under the leaves of the old sycamore-trees,
      the flames with the black smoke from the pitch-pine curling and rising;	      the flames with the black smoke from the pitch-pine curling and rising;	      the flames with the black smoke from the pitch-pine curling and rising;	      the flames with the black smoke from the pitch-pine curling and rising;
  Southern fishermen fishing, the sounds and inlets of North	  Southern fishermen fishing, the sounds and inlets of North	  Southern fishermen fishing, the sounds and inlets of North	  Southern fishermen fishing, the sounds and inlets of North
      Carolina's coast, the shad-fishery and the herring-fishery, the	      Carolina's coast, the shad-fishery and the herring-fishery, the	      Carolina's coast, the shad-fishery and the herring-fishery, the	      Carolina's coast, the shad-fishery and the herring-fishery, the
      large sweep-seines, the windlasses on shore work'd by horses, the	      large sweep-seines, the windlasses on shore work'd by horses, the	      large sweep-seines, the windlasses on shore work'd by horses, the	      large sweep-seines, the windlasses on shore work'd by horses, the
      clearing, curing, and packing-houses;	      clearing, curing, and packing-houses;	      clearing, curing, and packing-houses;	      clearing, curing, and packing-houses;
  Deep in the forest in piney woods turpentine dropping from the	  Deep in the forest in piney woods turpentine dropping from the	  Deep in the forest in piney woods turpentine dropping from the	  Deep in the forest in piney woods turpentine dropping from the
      incisions in the trees, there are the turpentine works,	      incisions in the trees, there are the turpentine works,	      incisions in the trees, there are the turpentine works,	      incisions in the trees, there are the turpentine works,
  There are the negroes at work in good health, the ground in all	  There are the negroes at work in good health, the ground in all	  There are the negroes at work in good health, the ground in all	  There are the negroes at work in good health, the ground in all
      directions is cover'd with pine straw;	      directions is cover'd with pine straw;	      directions is cover'd with pine straw;	      directions is cover'd with pine straw;
  In Tennessee and Kentucky slaves busy in the coalings, at the forge,	  In Tennessee and Kentucky slaves busy in the coalings, at the forge,	  In Tennessee and Kentucky slaves busy in the coalings, at the forge,	  In Tennessee and Kentucky slaves busy in the coalings, at the forge,
      by the furnace-blaze, or at the corn-shucking,	      by the furnace-blaze, or at the corn-shucking,	      by the furnace-blaze, or at the corn-shucking,	      by the furnace-blaze, or at the corn-shucking,
  In Virginia, the planter's son returning after a long absence,	  In Virginia, the planter's son returning after a long absence,	  In Virginia, the planter's son returning after a long absence,	  In Virginia, the planter's son returning after a long absence,
      joyfully welcom'd and kiss'd by the aged mulatto nurse,	      joyfully welcom'd and kiss'd by the aged mulatto nurse,	      joyfully welcom'd and kiss'd by the aged mulatto nurse,	      joyfully welcom'd and kiss'd by the aged mulatto nurse,
  On rivers boatmen safely moor'd at nightfall in their boats under	  On rivers boatmen safely moor'd at nightfall in their boats under	  On rivers boatmen safely moor'd at nightfall in their boats under	  On rivers boatmen safely moor'd at nightfall in their boats under
      shelter of high banks,	      shelter of high banks,	      shelter of high banks,	      shelter of high banks,
  Some of the younger men dance to the sound of the banjo or fiddle,	  Some of the younger men dance to the sound of the banjo or fiddle,	  Some of the younger men dance to the sound of the banjo or fiddle,	  Some of the younger men dance to the sound of the banjo or fiddle,
      others sit on the gunwale smoking and talking;	      others sit on the gunwale smoking and talking;	      others sit on the gunwale smoking and talking;	      others sit on the gunwale smoking and talking;
  Late in the afternoon the mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing	  Late in the afternoon the mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing	  Late in the afternoon the mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing	  Late in the afternoon the mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing
      in the Great Dismal Swamp,	      in the Great Dismal Swamp,	      in the Great Dismal Swamp,	      in the Great Dismal Swamp,
  There are the greenish waters, the resinous odor, the plenteous	  There are the greenish waters, the resinous odor, the plenteous	  There are the greenish waters, the resinous odor, the plenteous	  There are the greenish waters, the resinous odor, the plenteous
      moss, the cypress-tree, and the juniper-tree;	      moss, the cypress-tree, and the juniper-tree;	      moss, the cypress-tree, and the juniper-tree;	      moss, the cypress-tree, and the juniper-tree;
  Northward, young men of Mannahatta, the target company from an	  Northward, young men of Mannahatta, the target company from an	  Northward, young men of Mannahatta, the target company from an	  Northward, young men of Mannahatta, the target company from an
      excursion returning home at evening, the musket-muzzles all	      excursion returning home at evening, the musket-muzzles all	      excursion returning home at evening, the musket-muzzles all	      excursion returning home at evening, the musket-muzzles all
      bear bunches of flowers presented by women;	      bear bunches of flowers presented by women;	      bear bunches of flowers presented by women;	      bear bunches of flowers presented by women;
  Children at play, or on his father's lap a young boy fallen asleep,	  Children at play, or on his father's lap a young boy fallen asleep,	  Children at play, or on his father's lap a young boy fallen asleep,	  Children at play, or on his father's lap a young boy fallen asleep,
      (how his lips move! how he smiles in his sleep!)	      (how his lips move! how he smiles in his sleep!)	      (how his lips move! how he smiles in his sleep!)	      (how his lips move! how he smiles in his sleep!)
  The scout riding on horseback over the plains west of the	  The scout riding on horseback over the plains west of the	  The scout riding on horseback over the plains west of the	  The scout riding on horseback over the plains west of the
      Mississippi, he ascends a knoll and sweeps his eyes around;	      Mississippi, he ascends a knoll and sweeps his eyes around;	      Mississippi, he ascends a knoll and sweeps his eyes around;	      Mississippi, he ascends a knoll and sweeps his eyes around;
  California life, the miner, bearded, dress'd in his rude costume,	  California life, the miner, bearded, dress'd in his rude costume,	  California life, the miner, bearded, dress'd in his rude costume,	  California life, the miner, bearded, dress'd in his rude costume,
      the stanch California friendship, the sweet air, the graves one	      the stanch California friendship, the sweet air, the graves one	      the stanch California friendship, the sweet air, the graves one	      the stanch California friendship, the sweet air, the graves one
      in passing meets solitary just aside the horse-path;	      in passing meets solitary just aside the horse-path;	      in passing meets solitary just aside the horse-path;	      in passing meets solitary just aside the horse-path;
  Down in Texas the cotton-field, the negro-cabins, drivers driving	  Down in Texas the cotton-field, the negro-cabins, drivers driving	  Down in Texas the cotton-field, the negro-cabins, drivers driving	  Down in Texas the cotton-field, the negro-cabins, drivers driving
      mules or oxen before rude carts, cotton bales piled on banks	      mules or oxen before rude carts, cotton bales piled on banks	      mules or oxen before rude carts, cotton bales piled on banks	      mules or oxen before rude carts, cotton bales piled on banks
      and wharves;	      and wharves;	      and wharves;	      and wharves;
  Encircling all, vast-darting up and wide, the American Soul, with	  Encircling all, vast-darting up and wide, the American Soul, with	  Encircling all, vast-darting up and wide, the American Soul, with	  Encircling all, vast-darting up and wide, the American Soul, with
      equal hemispheres, one Love, one Dilation or Pride;	      equal hemispheres, one Love, one Dilation or Pride;	      equal hemispheres, one Love, one Dilation or Pride;	      equal hemispheres, one Love, one Dilation or Pride;
  In arriere the peace-talk with the Iroquois the aborigines, the	  In arriere the peace-talk with the Iroquois the aborigines, the	  In arriere the peace-talk with the Iroquois the aborigines, the	  In arriere the peace-talk with the Iroquois the aborigines, the
      calumet, the pipe of good-will, arbitration, and indorsement,	      calumet, the pipe of good-will, arbitration, and indorsement,	      calumet, the pipe of good-will, arbitration, and indorsement,	      calumet, the pipe of good-will, arbitration, and indorsement,
  The sachem blowing the smoke first toward the sun and then toward	  The sachem blowing the smoke first toward the sun and then toward	  The sachem blowing the smoke first toward the sun and then toward	  The sachem blowing the smoke first toward the sun and then toward
      the earth,	      the earth,	      the earth,	      the earth,
  The drama of the scalp-dance enacted with painted faces and guttural	  The drama of the scalp-dance enacted with painted faces and guttural	  The drama of the scalp-dance enacted with painted faces and guttural	  The drama of the scalp-dance enacted with painted faces and guttural
      exclamations,	      exclamations,	      exclamations,	      exclamations,
  The setting out of the war-party, the long and stealthy march,	  The setting out of the war-party, the long and stealthy march,	  The setting out of the war-party, the long and stealthy march,	  The setting out of the war-party, the long and stealthy march,
  The single file, the swinging hatchets, the surprise and slaughter	  The single file, the swinging hatchets, the surprise and slaughter	  The single file, the swinging hatchets, the surprise and slaughter	  The single file, the swinging hatchets, the surprise and slaughter
      of enemies;	      of enemies;	      of enemies;	      of enemies;
  All the acts, scenes, ways, persons, attitudes of these States,	  All the acts, scenes, ways, persons, attitudes of these States,	  All the acts, scenes, ways, persons, attitudes of these States,	  All the acts, scenes, ways, persons, attitudes of these States,
      reminiscences, institutions,	      reminiscences, institutions,	      reminiscences, institutions,	      reminiscences, institutions,
  All these States compact, every square mile of these States without	  All these States compact, every square mile of these States without	  All these States compact, every square mile of these States without	  All these States compact, every square mile of these States without
      excepting a particle;	      excepting a particle;	      excepting a particle;	      excepting a particle;
  Me pleas'd, rambling in lanes and country fields, Paumanok's fields,	  Me pleas'd, rambling in lanes and country fields, Paumanok's fields,	  Me pleas'd, rambling in lanes and country fields, Paumanok's fields,	  Me pleas'd, rambling in lanes and country fields, Paumanok's fields,
  Observing the spiral flight of two little yellow butterflies	  Observing the spiral flight of two little yellow butterflies	  Observing the spiral flight of two little yellow butterflies	  Observing the spiral flight of two little yellow butterflies
      shuffling between each other, ascending high in the air,	      shuffling between each other, ascending high in the air,	      shuffling between each other, ascending high in the air,	      shuffling between each other, ascending high in the air,
  The darting swallow, the destroyer of insects, the fall traveler	  The darting swallow, the destroyer of insects, the fall traveler	  The darting swallow, the destroyer of insects, the fall traveler	  The darting swallow, the destroyer of insects, the fall traveler
      southward but returning northward early in the spring,	      southward but returning northward early in the spring,	      southward but returning northward early in the spring,	      southward but returning northward early in the spring,
  The country boy at the close of the day driving the herd of cows and	  The country boy at the close of the day driving the herd of cows and	  The country boy at the close of the day driving the herd of cows and	  The country boy at the close of the day driving the herd of cows and
      shouting to them as they loiter to browse by the roadside,	      shouting to them as they loiter to browse by the roadside,	      shouting to them as they loiter to browse by the roadside,	      shouting to them as they loiter to browse by the roadside,
  The city wharf, Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, New	  The city wharf, Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, New	  The city wharf, Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, New	  The city wharf, Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Charleston, New
      Orleans, San Francisco,	      Orleans, San Francisco,	      Orleans, San Francisco,	      Orleans, San Francisco,
  The departing ships when the sailors heave at the capstan;	  The departing ships when the sailors heave at the capstan;	  The departing ships when the sailors heave at the capstan;	  The departing ships when the sailors heave at the capstan;
  Evening--me in my room--the setting sun,	  Evening--me in my room--the setting sun,	  Evening--me in my room--the setting sun,	  Evening--me in my room--the setting sun,
  The setting summer sun shining in my open window, showing the	  The setting summer sun shining in my open window, showing the	  The setting summer sun shining in my open window, showing the	  The setting summer sun shining in my open window, showing the
      swarm of flies, suspended, balancing in the air in the centre	      swarm of flies, suspended, balancing in the air in the centre	      swarm of flies, suspended, balancing in the air in the centre	      swarm of flies, suspended, balancing in the air in the centre
      of the room, darting athwart, up and down, casting swift	      of the room, darting athwart, up and down, casting swift	      of the room, darting athwart, up and down, casting swift	      of the room, darting athwart, up and down, casting swift
      shadows in specks on the opposite wall where the shine is;	      shadows in specks on the opposite wall where the shine is;	      shadows in specks on the opposite wall where the shine is;	      shadows in specks on the opposite wall where the shine is;
  The athletic American matron speaking in public to crowds of listeners,	  The athletic American matron speaking in public to crowds of listeners,	  The athletic American matron speaking in public to crowds of listeners,	  The athletic American matron speaking in public to crowds of listeners,
  Males, females, immigrants, combinations, the copiousness, the	  Males, females, immigrants, combinations, the copiousness, the	  Males, females, immigrants, combinations, the copiousness, the	  Males, females, immigrants, combinations, the copiousness, the
      individuality of the States, each for itself--the moneymakers,	      individuality of the States, each for itself--the moneymakers,	      individuality of the States, each for itself--the moneymakers,	      individuality of the States, each for itself--the moneymakers,
  Factories, machinery, the mechanical forces, the windlass, lever,	  Factories, machinery, the mechanical forces, the windlass, lever,	  Factories, machinery, the mechanical forces, the windlass, lever,	  Factories, machinery, the mechanical forces, the windlass, lever,
      pulley, all certainties,	      pulley, all certainties,	      pulley, all certainties,	      pulley, all certainties,
  The certainty of space, increase, freedom, futurity,	  The certainty of space, increase, freedom, futurity,	  The certainty of space, increase, freedom, futurity,	  The certainty of space, increase, freedom, futurity,
  In space the sporades, the scatter'd islands, the stars--on the firm	  In space the sporades, the scatter'd islands, the stars--on the firm	  In space the sporades, the scatter'd islands, the stars--on the firm	  In space the sporades, the scatter'd islands, the stars--on the firm
      earth, the lands, my lands,	      earth, the lands, my lands,	      earth, the lands, my lands,	      earth, the lands, my lands,
  O lands! all so dear to me--what you are, (whatever it is,) I putting it	  O lands! all so dear to me--what you are, (whatever it is,) I putting it	  O lands! all so dear to me--what you are, (whatever it is,) I putting it	  O lands! all so dear to me--what you are, (whatever it is,) I putting it
      at random in these songs, become a part of that, whatever it is,	      at random in these songs, become a part of that, whatever it is,	      at random in these songs, become a part of that, whatever it is,	      at random in these songs, become a part of that, whatever it is,
  Southward there, I screaming, with wings slow flapping, with the	  Southward there, I screaming, with wings slow flapping, with the	  Southward there, I screaming, with wings slow flapping, with the	  Southward there, I screaming, with wings slow flapping, with the
      myriads of gulls wintering along the coasts of Florida,	      myriads of gulls wintering along the coasts of Florida,	      myriads of gulls wintering along the coasts of Florida,	      myriads of gulls wintering along the coasts of Florida,
  Otherways there atwixt the banks of the Arkansaw, the Rio Grande,	  Otherways there atwixt the banks of the Arkansaw, the Rio Grande,	  Otherways there atwixt the banks of the Arkansaw, the Rio Grande,	  Otherways there atwixt the banks of the Arkansaw, the Rio Grande,
      the Nueces, the Brazos, the Tombigbee, the Red River, the	      the Nueces, the Brazos, the Tombigbee, the Red River, the	      the Nueces, the Brazos, the Tombigbee, the Red River, the	      the Nueces, the Brazos, the Tombigbee, the Red River, the
      Saskatchawan or the Osage, I with the spring waters laughing	      Saskatchawan or the Osage, I with the spring waters laughing	      Saskatchawan or the Osage, I with the spring waters laughing	      Saskatchawan or the Osage, I with the spring waters laughing
      and skipping and running,	      and skipping and running,	      and skipping and running,	      and skipping and running,
  Northward, on the sands, on some shallow bay of Paumanok, I with	  Northward, on the sands, on some shallow bay of Paumanok, I with	  Northward, on the sands, on some shallow bay of Paumanok, I with	  Northward, on the sands, on some shallow bay of Paumanok, I with
      parties of snowy herons wading in the wet to seek worms and	      parties of snowy herons wading in the wet to seek worms and	      parties of snowy herons wading in the wet to seek worms and	      parties of snowy herons wading in the wet to seek worms and
      aquatic plants,	      aquatic plants,	      aquatic plants,	      aquatic plants,
  Retreating, triumphantly twittering, the king-bird, from piercing	  Retreating, triumphantly twittering, the king-bird, from piercing	  Retreating, triumphantly twittering, the king-bird, from piercing	  Retreating, triumphantly twittering, the king-bird, from piercing
      the crow with its bill, for amusement--and I triumphantly twittering,	      the crow with its bill, for amusement--and I triumphantly twittering,	      the crow with its bill, for amusement--and I triumphantly twittering,	      the crow with its bill, for amusement--and I triumphantly twittering,
  The migrating flock of wild geese alighting in autumn to refresh	  The migrating flock of wild geese alighting in autumn to refresh	  The migrating flock of wild geese alighting in autumn to refresh	  The migrating flock of wild geese alighting in autumn to refresh
      themselves, the body of the flock feed, the sentinels outside	      themselves, the body of the flock feed, the sentinels outside	      themselves, the body of the flock feed, the sentinels outside	      themselves, the body of the flock feed, the sentinels outside
      move around with erect heads watching, and are from time to time	      move around with erect heads watching, and are from time to time	      move around with erect heads watching, and are from time to time	      move around with erect heads watching, and are from time to time
      reliev'd by other sentinels--and I feeding and taking turns	      reliev'd by other sentinels--and I feeding and taking turns	      reliev'd by other sentinels--and I feeding and taking turns	      reliev'd by other sentinels--and I feeding and taking turns
      with the rest,	      with the rest,	      with the rest,	      with the rest,
  In Kanadian forests the moose, large as an ox, corner'd by hunters,	  In Kanadian forests the moose, large as an ox, corner'd by hunters,	  In Kanadian forests the moose, large as an ox, corner'd by hunters,	  In Kanadian forests the moose, large as an ox, corner'd by hunters,
      rising desperately on his hind-feet, and plunging with his	      rising desperately on his hind-feet, and plunging with his	      rising desperately on his hind-feet, and plunging with his	      rising desperately on his hind-feet, and plunging with his
      fore-feet, the hoofs as sharp as knives--and I, plunging at the	      fore-feet, the hoofs as sharp as knives--and I, plunging at the	      fore-feet, the hoofs as sharp as knives--and I, plunging at the	      fore-feet, the hoofs as sharp as knives--and I, plunging at the
      hunters, corner'd and desperate,	      hunters, corner'd and desperate,	      hunters, corner'd and desperate,	      hunters, corner'd and desperate,
  In the Mannahatta, streets, piers, shipping, store-houses, and the	  In the Mannahatta, streets, piers, shipping, store-houses, and the	  In the Mannahatta, streets, piers, shipping, store-houses, and the	  In the Mannahatta, streets, piers, shipping, store-houses, and the
      countless workmen working in the shops,	      countless workmen working in the shops,	      countless workmen working in the shops,	      countless workmen working in the shops,
  And I too of the Mannahatta, singing thereof--and no less in myself	  And I too of the Mannahatta, singing thereof--and no less in myself	  And I too of the Mannahatta, singing thereof--and no less in myself	  And I too of the Mannahatta, singing thereof--and no less in myself
      than the whole of the Mannahatta in itself,	      than the whole of the Mannahatta in itself,	      than the whole of the Mannahatta in itself,	      than the whole of the Mannahatta in itself,
  Singing the song of These, my ever-united lands--my body no more	  Singing the song of These, my ever-united lands--my body no more	  Singing the song of These, my ever-united lands--my body no more	  Singing the song of These, my ever-united lands--my body no more
      inevitably united, part to part, and made out of a thousand	      inevitably united, part to part, and made out of a thousand	      inevitably united, part to part, and made out of a thousand	      inevitably united, part to part, and made out of a thousand
      diverse contributions one identity, any more than my lands	      diverse contributions one identity, any more than my lands	      diverse contributions one identity, any more than my lands	      diverse contributions one identity, any more than my lands
      are inevitably united and made ONE IDENTITY;	      are inevitably united and made ONE IDENTITY;	      are inevitably united and made ONE IDENTITY;	      are inevitably united and made ONE IDENTITY;
  Nativities, climates, the grass of the great pastoral Plains,	  Nativities, climates, the grass of the great pastoral Plains,	  Nativities, climates, the grass of the great pastoral Plains,	  Nativities, climates, the grass of the great pastoral Plains,
  Cities, labors, death, animals, products, war, good and evil--these me,	  Cities, labors, death, animals, products, war, good and evil--these me,	  Cities, labors, death, animals, products, war, good and evil--these me,	  Cities, labors, death, animals, products, war, good and evil--these me,
  These affording, in all their particulars, the old feuillage to me	  These affording, in all their particulars, the old feuillage to me	  These affording, in all their particulars, the old feuillage to me	  These affording, in all their particulars, the old feuillage to me
      and to America, how can I do less than pass the clew of the union	      and to America, how can I do less than pass the clew of the union	      and to America, how can I do less than pass the clew of the union	      and to America, how can I do less than pass the clew of the union
      of them, to afford the like to you?	      of them, to afford the like to you?	      of them, to afford the like to you?	      of them, to afford the like to you?
  Whoever you are! how can I but offer you divine leaves, that you	  Whoever you are! how can I but offer you divine leaves, that you	  Whoever you are! how can I but offer you divine leaves, that you	  Whoever you are! how can I but offer you divine leaves, that you
      also be eligible as I am?	      also be eligible as I am?	      also be eligible as I am?	      also be eligible as I am?
  How can I but as here chanting, invite you for yourself to collect	  How can I but as here chanting, invite you for yourself to collect	  How can I but as here chanting, invite you for yourself to collect	  How can I but as here chanting, invite you for yourself to collect
      bouquets of the incomparable feuillage of these States?	      bouquets of the incomparable feuillage of these States?	      bouquets of the incomparable feuillage of these States?	      bouquets of the incomparable feuillage of these States?
			
			
			
			
BOOK XI	BOOK XI	BOOK XI	BOOK XI
			
			
A Song of Joys	A Song of Joys	A Song of Joys	A Song of Joys
			
  O to make the most jubilant song!	  O to make the most jubilant song!	  O to make the most jubilant song!	  O to make the most jubilant song!
  Full of music--full of manhood, womanhood, infancy!	  Full of music--full of manhood, womanhood, infancy!	  Full of music--full of manhood, womanhood, infancy!	  Full of music--full of manhood, womanhood, infancy!
  Full of common employments--full of grain and trees.	  Full of common employments--full of grain and trees.	  Full of common employments--full of grain and trees.	  Full of common employments--full of grain and trees.
			
  O for the voices of animals--O for the swiftness and balance of fishes!	  O for the voices of animals--O for the swiftness and balance of fishes!	  O for the voices of animals--O for the swiftness and balance of fishes!	  O for the voices of animals--O for the swiftness and balance of fishes!
  O for the dropping of raindrops in a song!	  O for the dropping of raindrops in a song!	  O for the dropping of raindrops in a song!	  O for the dropping of raindrops in a song!
  O for the sunshine and motion of waves in a song!	  O for the sunshine and motion of waves in a song!	  O for the sunshine and motion of waves in a song!	  O for the sunshine and motion of waves in a song!
			
  O the joy of my spirit--it is uncaged--it darts like lightning!	  O the joy of my spirit--it is uncaged--it darts like lightning!	  O the joy of my spirit--it is uncaged--it darts like lightning!	  O the joy of my spirit--it is uncaged--it darts like lightning!
  It is not enough to have this globe or a certain time,	  It is not enough to have this globe or a certain time,	  It is not enough to have this globe or a certain time,	  It is not enough to have this globe or a certain time,
  I will have thousands of globes and all time.	  I will have thousands of globes and all time.	  I will have thousands of globes and all time.	  I will have thousands of globes and all time.
			
  O the engineer's joys! to go with a locomotive!	  O the engineer's joys! to go with a locomotive!	  O the engineer's joys! to go with a locomotive!	  O the engineer's joys! to go with a locomotive!
  To hear the hiss of steam, the merry shriek, the steam-whistle, the	  To hear the hiss of steam, the merry shriek, the steam-whistle, the	  To hear the hiss of steam, the merry shriek, the steam-whistle, the	  To hear the hiss of steam, the merry shriek, the steam-whistle, the
      laughing locomotive!	      laughing locomotive!	      laughing locomotive!	      laughing locomotive!
  To push with resistless way and speed off in the distance.	  To push with resistless way and speed off in the distance.	  To push with resistless way and speed off in the distance.	  To push with resistless way and speed off in the distance.
			
  O the gleesome saunter over fields and hillsides!	  O the gleesome saunter over fields and hillsides!	  O the gleesome saunter over fields and hillsides!	  O the gleesome saunter over fields and hillsides!
  The leaves and flowers of the commonest weeds, the moist fresh	  The leaves and flowers of the commonest weeds, the moist fresh	  The leaves and flowers of the commonest weeds, the moist fresh	  The leaves and flowers of the commonest weeds, the moist fresh
      stillness of the woods,	      stillness of the woods,	      stillness of the woods,	      stillness of the woods,
  The exquisite smell of the earth at daybreak, and all through the forenoon.	  The exquisite smell of the earth at daybreak, and all through the forenoon.	  The exquisite smell of the earth at daybreak, and all through the forenoon.	  The exquisite smell of the earth at daybreak, and all through the forenoon.
			
  O the horseman's and horsewoman's joys!	  O the horseman's and horsewoman's joys!	  O the horseman's and horsewoman's joys!	  O the horseman's and horsewoman's joys!
  The saddle, the gallop, the pressure upon the seat, the cool	  The saddle, the gallop, the pressure upon the seat, the cool	  The saddle, the gallop, the pressure upon the seat, the cool	  The saddle, the gallop, the pressure upon the seat, the cool
      gurgling by the ears and hair.	      gurgling by the ears and hair.	      gurgling by the ears and hair.	      gurgling by the ears and hair.
			
  O the fireman's joys!	  O the fireman's joys!	  O the fireman's joys!	  O the fireman's joys!
  I hear the alarm at dead of night,	  I hear the alarm at dead of night,	  I hear the alarm at dead of night,	  I hear the alarm at dead of night,
  I hear bells, shouts! I pass the crowd, I run!	  I hear bells, shouts! I pass the crowd, I run!	  I hear bells, shouts! I pass the crowd, I run!	  I hear bells, shouts! I pass the crowd, I run!
  The sight of the flames maddens me with pleasure.	  The sight of the flames maddens me with pleasure.	  The sight of the flames maddens me with pleasure.	  The sight of the flames maddens me with pleasure.
			
  O the joy of the strong-brawn'd fighter, towering in the arena in	  O the joy of the strong-brawn'd fighter, towering in the arena in	  O the joy of the strong-brawn'd fighter, towering in the arena in	  O the joy of the strong-brawn'd fighter, towering in the arena in
      perfect condition, conscious of power, thirsting to meet his opponent.	      perfect condition, conscious of power, thirsting to meet his opponent.	      perfect condition, conscious of power, thirsting to meet his opponent.	      perfect condition, conscious of power, thirsting to meet his opponent.
			
  O the joy of that vast elemental sympathy which only the human soul is	  O the joy of that vast elemental sympathy which only the human soul is	  O the joy of that vast elemental sympathy which only the human soul is	  O the joy of that vast elemental sympathy which only the human soul is
      capable of generating and emitting in steady and limitless floods.	      capable of generating and emitting in steady and limitless floods.	      capable of generating and emitting in steady and limitless floods.	      capable of generating and emitting in steady and limitless floods.
			
  O the mother's joys!	  O the mother's joys!	  O the mother's joys!	  O the mother's joys!
  The watching, the endurance, the precious love, the anguish, the	  The watching, the endurance, the precious love, the anguish, the	  The watching, the endurance, the precious love, the anguish, the	  The watching, the endurance, the precious love, the anguish, the
      patiently yielded life.	      patiently yielded life.	      patiently yielded life.	      patiently yielded life.
			
  O the of increase, growth, recuperation,	  O the of increase, growth, recuperation,	  O the of increase, growth, recuperation,	  O the of increase, growth, recuperation,
  The joy of soothing and pacifying, the joy of concord and harmony.	  The joy of soothing and pacifying, the joy of concord and harmony.	  The joy of soothing and pacifying, the joy of concord and harmony.	  The joy of soothing and pacifying, the joy of concord and harmony.
			
  O to go back to the place where I was born,	  O to go back to the place where I was born,	  O to go back to the place where I was born,	  O to go back to the place where I was born,
  To hear the birds sing once more,	  To hear the birds sing once more,	  To hear the birds sing once more,	  To hear the birds sing once more,
  To ramble about the house and barn and over the fields once more,	  To ramble about the house and barn and over the fields once more,	  To ramble about the house and barn and over the fields once more,	  To ramble about the house and barn and over the fields once more,
  And through the orchard and along the old lanes once more.	  And through the orchard and along the old lanes once more.	  And through the orchard and along the old lanes once more.	  And through the orchard and along the old lanes once more.
			
  O to have been brought up on bays, lagoons, creeks, or along the coast,	  O to have been brought up on bays, lagoons, creeks, or along the coast,	  O to have been brought up on bays, lagoons, creeks, or along the coast,	  O to have been brought up on bays, lagoons, creeks, or along the coast,
  To continue and be employ'd there all my life,	  To continue and be employ'd there all my life,	  To continue and be employ'd there all my life,	  To continue and be employ'd there all my life,
  The briny and damp smell, the shore, the salt weeds exposed at low water,	  The briny and damp smell, the shore, the salt weeds exposed at low water,	  The briny and damp smell, the shore, the salt weeds exposed at low water,	  The briny and damp smell, the shore, the salt weeds exposed at low water,
  The work of fishermen, the work of the eel-fisher and clam-fisher;	  The work of fishermen, the work of the eel-fisher and clam-fisher;	  The work of fishermen, the work of the eel-fisher and clam-fisher;	  The work of fishermen, the work of the eel-fisher and clam-fisher;
  I come with my clam-rake and spade, I come with my eel-spear,	  I come with my clam-rake and spade, I come with my eel-spear,	  I come with my clam-rake and spade, I come with my eel-spear,	  I come with my clam-rake and spade, I come with my eel-spear,
  Is the tide out? I Join the group of clam-diggers on the flats,	  Is the tide out? I Join the group of clam-diggers on the flats,	  Is the tide out? I Join the group of clam-diggers on the flats,	  Is the tide out? I Join the group of clam-diggers on the flats,
  I laugh and work with them, I joke at my work like a mettlesome young man;	  I laugh and work with them, I joke at my work like a mettlesome young man;	  I laugh and work with them, I joke at my work like a mettlesome young man;	  I laugh and work with them, I joke at my work like a mettlesome young man;
  In winter I take my eel-basket and eel-spear and travel out on foot	  In winter I take my eel-basket and eel-spear and travel out on foot	  In winter I take my eel-basket and eel-spear and travel out on foot	  In winter I take my eel-basket and eel-spear and travel out on foot
      on the ice--I have a small axe to cut holes in the ice,	      on the ice--I have a small axe to cut holes in the ice,	      on the ice--I have a small axe to cut holes in the ice,	      on the ice--I have a small axe to cut holes in the ice,
  Behold me well-clothed going gayly or returning in the afternoon,	  Behold me well-clothed going gayly or returning in the afternoon,	  Behold me well-clothed going gayly or returning in the afternoon,	  Behold me well-clothed going gayly or returning in the afternoon,
      my brood of tough boys accompanying me,	      my brood of tough boys accompanying me,	      my brood of tough boys accompanying me,	      my brood of tough boys accompanying me,
  My brood of grown and part-grown boys, who love to be with no	  My brood of grown and part-grown boys, who love to be with no	  My brood of grown and part-grown boys, who love to be with no	  My brood of grown and part-grown boys, who love to be with no
      one else so well as they love to be with me,	      one else so well as they love to be with me,	      one else so well as they love to be with me,	      one else so well as they love to be with me,
  By day to work with me, and by night to sleep with me.	  By day to work with me, and by night to sleep with me.	  By day to work with me, and by night to sleep with me.	  By day to work with me, and by night to sleep with me.
			
  Another time in warm weather out in a boat, to lift the lobster-pots	  Another time in warm weather out in a boat, to lift the lobster-pots	  Another time in warm weather out in a boat, to lift the lobster-pots	  Another time in warm weather out in a boat, to lift the lobster-pots
      where they are sunk with heavy stones, (I know the buoys,)	      where they are sunk with heavy stones, (I know the buoys,)	      where they are sunk with heavy stones, (I know the buoys,)	      where they are sunk with heavy stones, (I know the buoys,)
  O the sweetness of the Fifth-month morning upon the water as I row	  O the sweetness of the Fifth-month morning upon the water as I row	  O the sweetness of the Fifth-month morning upon the water as I row	  O the sweetness of the Fifth-month morning upon the water as I row
      just before sunrise toward the buoys,	      just before sunrise toward the buoys,	      just before sunrise toward the buoys,	      just before sunrise toward the buoys,
  I pull the wicker pots up slantingly, the dark green lobsters are	  I pull the wicker pots up slantingly, the dark green lobsters are	  I pull the wicker pots up slantingly, the dark green lobsters are	  I pull the wicker pots up slantingly, the dark green lobsters are
      desperate with their claws as I take them out, I insert	      desperate with their claws as I take them out, I insert	      desperate with their claws as I take them out, I insert	      desperate with their claws as I take them out, I insert
      wooden pegs in the 'oints of their pincers,	      wooden pegs in the 'oints of their pincers,	      wooden pegs in the 'oints of their pincers,	      wooden pegs in the 'oints of their pincers,
			
  I go to all the places one after another, and then row back to the shore,	  I go to all the places one after another, and then row back to the shore,	  I go to all the places one after another, and then row back to the shore,	  I go to all the places one after another, and then row back to the shore,
  There in a huge kettle of boiling water the lobsters shall be boil'd	  There in a huge kettle of boiling water the lobsters shall be boil'd	  There in a huge kettle of boiling water the lobsters shall be boil'd	  There in a huge kettle of boiling water the lobsters shall be boil'd
      till their color becomes scarlet.	      till their color becomes scarlet.	      till their color becomes scarlet.	      till their color becomes scarlet.
			
  Another time mackerel-taking,	  Another time mackerel-taking,	  Another time mackerel-taking,	  Another time mackerel-taking,
  Voracious, mad for the hook, near the surface, they seem to fill the	  Voracious, mad for the hook, near the surface, they seem to fill the	  Voracious, mad for the hook, near the surface, they seem to fill the	  Voracious, mad for the hook, near the surface, they seem to fill the
      water for miles;	      water for miles;	      water for miles;	      water for miles;
  Another time fishing for rock-fish in Chesapeake bay, I one of the	  Another time fishing for rock-fish in Chesapeake bay, I one of the	  Another time fishing for rock-fish in Chesapeake bay, I one of the	  Another time fishing for rock-fish in Chesapeake bay, I one of the
      brown-faced crew;	      brown-faced crew;	      brown-faced crew;	      brown-faced crew;
  Another time trailing for blue-fish off Paumanok, I stand with braced body,	  Another time trailing for blue-fish off Paumanok, I stand with braced body,	  Another time trailing for blue-fish off Paumanok, I stand with braced body,	  Another time trailing for blue-fish off Paumanok, I stand with braced body,
  My left foot is on the gunwale, my right arm throws far out the	  My left foot is on the gunwale, my right arm throws far out the	  My left foot is on the gunwale, my right arm throws far out the	  My left foot is on the gunwale, my right arm throws far out the
      coils of slender rope,	      coils of slender rope,	      coils of slender rope,	      coils of slender rope,
  In sight around me the quick veering and darting of fifty skiffs, my	  In sight around me the quick veering and darting of fifty skiffs, my	  In sight around me the quick veering and darting of fifty skiffs, my	  In sight around me the quick veering and darting of fifty skiffs, my
      companions.	      companions.	      companions.	      companions.
			
  O boating on the rivers,	  O boating on the rivers,	  O boating on the rivers,	  O boating on the rivers,
  The voyage down the St. Lawrence, the superb scenery, the steamers,	  The voyage down the St. Lawrence, the superb scenery, the steamers,	  The voyage down the St. Lawrence, the superb scenery, the steamers,	  The voyage down the St. Lawrence, the superb scenery, the steamers,
  The ships sailing, the Thousand Islands, the occasional timber-raft	  The ships sailing, the Thousand Islands, the occasional timber-raft	  The ships sailing, the Thousand Islands, the occasional timber-raft	  The ships sailing, the Thousand Islands, the occasional timber-raft
      and the raftsmen with long-reaching sweep-oars,	      and the raftsmen with long-reaching sweep-oars,	      and the raftsmen with long-reaching sweep-oars,	      and the raftsmen with long-reaching sweep-oars,
  The little huts on the rafts, and the stream of smoke when they cook	  The little huts on the rafts, and the stream of smoke when they cook	  The little huts on the rafts, and the stream of smoke when they cook	  The little huts on the rafts, and the stream of smoke when they cook
      supper at evening.	      supper at evening.	      supper at evening.	      supper at evening.
			
  (O something pernicious and dread!	  (O something pernicious and dread!	  (O something pernicious and dread!	  (O something pernicious and dread!
  Something far away from a puny and pious life!	  Something far away from a puny and pious life!	  Something far away from a puny and pious life!	  Something far away from a puny and pious life!
  Something unproved! something in a trance!	  Something unproved! something in a trance!	  Something unproved! something in a trance!	  Something unproved! something in a trance!
  Something escaped from the anchorage and driving free.)	  Something escaped from the anchorage and driving free.)	  Something escaped from the anchorage and driving free.)	  Something escaped from the anchorage and driving free.)
			
  O to work in mines, or forging iron,	  O to work in mines, or forging iron,	  O to work in mines, or forging iron,	  O to work in mines, or forging iron,
  Foundry casting, the foundry itself, the rude high roof, the ample	  Foundry casting, the foundry itself, the rude high roof, the ample	  Foundry casting, the foundry itself, the rude high roof, the ample	  Foundry casting, the foundry itself, the rude high roof, the ample
      and shadow'd space,	      and shadow'd space,	      and shadow'd space,	      and shadow'd space,
  The furnace, the hot liquid pour'd out and running.	  The furnace, the hot liquid pour'd out and running.	  The furnace, the hot liquid pour'd out and running.	  The furnace, the hot liquid pour'd out and running.
			
  O to resume the joys of the soldier!	  O to resume the joys of the soldier!	  O to resume the joys of the soldier!	  O to resume the joys of the soldier!
  To feel the presence of a brave commanding officer--to feel his sympathy!	  To feel the presence of a brave commanding officer--to feel his sympathy!	  To feel the presence of a brave commanding officer--to feel his sympathy!	  To feel the presence of a brave commanding officer--to feel his sympathy!
  To behold his calmness--to be warm'd in the rays of his smile!	  To behold his calmness--to be warm'd in the rays of his smile!	  To behold his calmness--to be warm'd in the rays of his smile!	  To behold his calmness--to be warm'd in the rays of his smile!
  To go to battle--to hear the bugles play and the drums beat!	  To go to battle--to hear the bugles play and the drums beat!	  To go to battle--to hear the bugles play and the drums beat!	  To go to battle--to hear the bugles play and the drums beat!
  To hear the crash of artillery--to see the glittering of the bayonets	  To hear the crash of artillery--to see the glittering of the bayonets	  To hear the crash of artillery--to see the glittering of the bayonets	  To hear the crash of artillery--to see the glittering of the bayonets
      and musket-barrels in the sun!	      and musket-barrels in the sun!	      and musket-barrels in the sun!	      and musket-barrels in the sun!
			
  To see men fall and die and not complain!	  To see men fall and die and not complain!	  To see men fall and die and not complain!	  To see men fall and die and not complain!
  To taste the savage taste of blood--to be so devilish!	  To taste the savage taste of blood--to be so devilish!	  To taste the savage taste of blood--to be so devilish!	  To taste the savage taste of blood--to be so devilish!
  To gloat so over the wounds and deaths of the enemy.	  To gloat so over the wounds and deaths of the enemy.	  To gloat so over the wounds and deaths of the enemy.	  To gloat so over the wounds and deaths of the enemy.
			
  O the whaleman's joys! O I cruise my old cruise again!	  O the whaleman's joys! O I cruise my old cruise again!	  O the whaleman's joys! O I cruise my old cruise again!	  O the whaleman's joys! O I cruise my old cruise again!
  I feel the ship's motion under me, I feel the Atlantic breezes fanning me,	  I feel the ship's motion under me, I feel the Atlantic breezes fanning me,	  I feel the ship's motion under me, I feel the Atlantic breezes fanning me,	  I feel the ship's motion under me, I feel the Atlantic breezes fanning me,
  I hear the cry again sent down from the mast-head, There--she blows!	  I hear the cry again sent down from the mast-head, There--she blows!	  I hear the cry again sent down from the mast-head, There--she blows!	  I hear the cry again sent down from the mast-head, There--she blows!
  Again I spring up the rigging to look with the rest--we descend,	  Again I spring up the rigging to look with the rest--we descend,	  Again I spring up the rigging to look with the rest--we descend,	  Again I spring up the rigging to look with the rest--we descend,
      wild with excitement,	      wild with excitement,	      wild with excitement,	      wild with excitement,
  I leap in the lower'd boat, we row toward our prey where he lies,	  I leap in the lower'd boat, we row toward our prey where he lies,	  I leap in the lower'd boat, we row toward our prey where he lies,	  I leap in the lower'd boat, we row toward our prey where he lies,
  We approach stealthy and silent, I see the mountainous mass,	  We approach stealthy and silent, I see the mountainous mass,	  We approach stealthy and silent, I see the mountainous mass,	  We approach stealthy and silent, I see the mountainous mass,
      lethargic, basking,	      lethargic, basking,	      lethargic, basking,	      lethargic, basking,
  I see the harpooneer standing up, I see the weapon dart from his	  I see the harpooneer standing up, I see the weapon dart from his	  I see the harpooneer standing up, I see the weapon dart from his	  I see the harpooneer standing up, I see the weapon dart from his
      vigorous arm;	      vigorous arm;	      vigorous arm;	      vigorous arm;
  O swift again far out in the ocean the wounded whale, settling,	  O swift again far out in the ocean the wounded whale, settling,	  O swift again far out in the ocean the wounded whale, settling,	  O swift again far out in the ocean the wounded whale, settling,
      running to windward, tows me,	      running to windward, tows me,	      running to windward, tows me,	      running to windward, tows me,
  Again I see him rise to breathe, we row close again,	  Again I see him rise to breathe, we row close again,	  Again I see him rise to breathe, we row close again,	  Again I see him rise to breathe, we row close again,
  I see a lance driven through his side, press'd deep, turn'd in the wound,	  I see a lance driven through his side, press'd deep, turn'd in the wound,	  I see a lance driven through his side, press'd deep, turn'd in the wound,	  I see a lance driven through his side, press'd deep, turn'd in the wound,
  Again we back off, I see him settle again, the life is leaving him fast,	  Again we back off, I see him settle again, the life is leaving him fast,	  Again we back off, I see him settle again, the life is leaving him fast,	  Again we back off, I see him settle again, the life is leaving him fast,
  As he rises he spouts blood, I see him swim in circles narrower and	  As he rises he spouts blood, I see him swim in circles narrower and	  As he rises he spouts blood, I see him swim in circles narrower and	  As he rises he spouts blood, I see him swim in circles narrower and
      narrower, swiftly cutting the water--I see him die,	      narrower, swiftly cutting the water--I see him die,	      narrower, swiftly cutting the water--I see him die,	      narrower, swiftly cutting the water--I see him die,
  He gives one convulsive leap in the centre of the circle, and then	  He gives one convulsive leap in the centre of the circle, and then	  He gives one convulsive leap in the centre of the circle, and then	  He gives one convulsive leap in the centre of the circle, and then
      falls flat and still in the bloody foam.	      falls flat and still in the bloody foam.	      falls flat and still in the bloody foam.	      falls flat and still in the bloody foam.
			
  O the old manhood of me, my noblest joy of all!	  O the old manhood of me, my noblest joy of all!	  O the old manhood of me, my noblest joy of all!	  O the old manhood of me, my noblest joy of all!
  My children and grand-children, my white hair and beard,	  My children and grand-children, my white hair and beard,	  My children and grand-children, my white hair and beard,	  My children and grand-children, my white hair and beard,
  My largeness, calmness, majesty, out of the long stretch of my life.	  My largeness, calmness, majesty, out of the long stretch of my life.	  My largeness, calmness, majesty, out of the long stretch of my life.	  My largeness, calmness, majesty, out of the long stretch of my life.
			
  O ripen'd joy of womanhood! O happiness at last!	  O ripen'd joy of womanhood! O happiness at last!	  O ripen'd joy of womanhood! O happiness at last!	  O ripen'd joy of womanhood! O happiness at last!
  I am more than eighty years of age, I am the most venerable mother,	  I am more than eighty years of age, I am the most venerable mother,	  I am more than eighty years of age, I am the most venerable mother,	  I am more than eighty years of age, I am the most venerable mother,
  How clear is my mind--how all people draw nigh to me!	  How clear is my mind--how all people draw nigh to me!	  How clear is my mind--how all people draw nigh to me!	  How clear is my mind--how all people draw nigh to me!
  What attractions are these beyond any before? what bloom more	  What attractions are these beyond any before? what bloom more	  What attractions are these beyond any before? what bloom more	  What attractions are these beyond any before? what bloom more
      than the bloom of youth?	      than the bloom of youth?	      than the bloom of youth?	      than the bloom of youth?
  What beauty is this that descends upon me and rises out of me?	  What beauty is this that descends upon me and rises out of me?	  What beauty is this that descends upon me and rises out of me?	  What beauty is this that descends upon me and rises out of me?
			
  O the orator's joys!	  O the orator's joys!	  O the orator's joys!	  O the orator's joys!
  To inflate the chest, to roll the thunder of the voice out from the	  To inflate the chest, to roll the thunder of the voice out from the	  To inflate the chest, to roll the thunder of the voice out from the	  To inflate the chest, to roll the thunder of the voice out from the
      ribs and throat,	      ribs and throat,	      ribs and throat,	      ribs and throat,
  To make the people rage, weep, hate, desire, with yourself,	  To make the people rage, weep, hate, desire, with yourself,	  To make the people rage, weep, hate, desire, with yourself,	  To make the people rage, weep, hate, desire, with yourself,
  To lead America--to quell America with a great tongue.	  To lead America--to quell America with a great tongue.	  To lead America--to quell America with a great tongue.	  To lead America--to quell America with a great tongue.
			
  O the joy of my soul leaning pois'd on itself, receiving identity through	  O the joy of my soul leaning pois'd on itself, receiving identity through	  O the joy of my soul leaning pois'd on itself, receiving identity through	  O the joy of my soul leaning pois'd on itself, receiving identity through
      materials and loving them, observing characters and absorbing them,	      materials and loving them, observing characters and absorbing them,	      materials and loving them, observing characters and absorbing them,	      materials and loving them, observing characters and absorbing them,
  My soul vibrated back to me from them, from sight, hearing, touch,	  My soul vibrated back to me from them, from sight, hearing, touch,	  My soul vibrated back to me from them, from sight, hearing, touch,	  My soul vibrated back to me from them, from sight, hearing, touch,
      reason, articulation, comparison, memory, and the like,	      reason, articulation, comparison, memory, and the like,	      reason, articulation, comparison, memory, and the like,	      reason, articulation, comparison, memory, and the like,
  The real life of my senses and flesh transcending my senses and flesh,	  The real life of my senses and flesh transcending my senses and flesh,	  The real life of my senses and flesh transcending my senses and flesh,	  The real life of my senses and flesh transcending my senses and flesh,
  My body done with materials, my sight done with my material eyes,	  My body done with materials, my sight done with my material eyes,	  My body done with materials, my sight done with my material eyes,	  My body done with materials, my sight done with my material eyes,
  Proved to me this day beyond cavil that it is not my material eyes	  Proved to me this day beyond cavil that it is not my material eyes	  Proved to me this day beyond cavil that it is not my material eyes	  Proved to me this day beyond cavil that it is not my material eyes
      which finally see,	      which finally see,	      which finally see,	      which finally see,
  Nor my material body which finally loves, walks, laughs, shouts,	  Nor my material body which finally loves, walks, laughs, shouts,	  Nor my material body which finally loves, walks, laughs, shouts,	  Nor my material body which finally loves, walks, laughs, shouts,
      embraces, procreates.	      embraces, procreates.	      embraces, procreates.	      embraces, procreates.
			
  O the farmer's joys!	  O the farmer's joys!	  O the farmer's joys!	  O the farmer's joys!
  Ohioan's, Illinoisian's, Wisconsinese', Kanadian's, Iowan's,	  Ohioan's, Illinoisian's, Wisconsinese', Kanadian's, Iowan's,	  Ohioan's, Illinoisian's, Wisconsinese', Kanadian's, Iowan's,	  Ohioan's, Illinoisian's, Wisconsinese', Kanadian's, Iowan's,
      Kansian's, Missourian's, Oregonese' joys!	      Kansian's, Missourian's, Oregonese' joys!	      Kansian's, Missourian's, Oregonese' joys!	      Kansian's, Missourian's, Oregonese' joys!
  To rise at peep of day and pass forth nimbly to work,	  To rise at peep of day and pass forth nimbly to work,	  To rise at peep of day and pass forth nimbly to work,	  To rise at peep of day and pass forth nimbly to work,
  To plough land in the fall for winter-sown crops,	  To plough land in the fall for winter-sown crops,	  To plough land in the fall for winter-sown crops,	  To plough land in the fall for winter-sown crops,
  To plough land in the spring for maize,	  To plough land in the spring for maize,	  To plough land in the spring for maize,	  To plough land in the spring for maize,
  To train orchards, to graft the trees, to gather apples in the fall.	  To train orchards, to graft the trees, to gather apples in the fall.	  To train orchards, to graft the trees, to gather apples in the fall.	  To train orchards, to graft the trees, to gather apples in the fall.
			
  O to bathe in the swimming-bath, or in a good place along shore,	  O to bathe in the swimming-bath, or in a good place along shore,	  O to bathe in the swimming-bath, or in a good place along shore,	  O to bathe in the swimming-bath, or in a good place along shore,
  To splash the water! to walk ankle-deep, or race naked along the shore.	  To splash the water! to walk ankle-deep, or race naked along the shore.	  To splash the water! to walk ankle-deep, or race naked along the shore.	  To splash the water! to walk ankle-deep, or race naked along the shore.
			
  O to realize space!	  O to realize space!	  O to realize space!	  O to realize space!
  The plenteousness of all, that there are no bounds,	  The plenteousness of all, that there are no bounds,	  The plenteousness of all, that there are no bounds,	  The plenteousness of all, that there are no bounds,
  To emerge and be of the sky, of the sun and moon and flying	  To emerge and be of the sky, of the sun and moon and flying	  To emerge and be of the sky, of the sun and moon and flying	  To emerge and be of the sky, of the sun and moon and flying
      clouds, as one with them.	      clouds, as one with them.	      clouds, as one with them.	      clouds, as one with them.
			
  O the joy a manly self-hood!	  O the joy a manly self-hood!	  O the joy a manly self-hood!	  O the joy a manly self-hood!
  To be servile to none, to defer to none, not to any tyrant known or unknown,	  To be servile to none, to defer to none, not to any tyrant known or unknown,	  To be servile to none, to defer to none, not to any tyrant known or unknown,	  To be servile to none, to defer to none, not to any tyrant known or unknown,
  To walk with erect carriage, a step springy and elastic,	  To walk with erect carriage, a step springy and elastic,	  To walk with erect carriage, a step springy and elastic,	  To walk with erect carriage, a step springy and elastic,
  To look with calm gaze or with a flashing eye,	  To look with calm gaze or with a flashing eye,	  To look with calm gaze or with a flashing eye,	  To look with calm gaze or with a flashing eye,
  To speak with a full and sonorous voice out of a broad chest,	  To speak with a full and sonorous voice out of a broad chest,	  To speak with a full and sonorous voice out of a broad chest,	  To speak with a full and sonorous voice out of a broad chest,
  To confront with your personality all the other personalities of the earth.	  To confront with your personality all the other personalities of the earth.	  To confront with your personality all the other personalities of the earth.	  To confront with your personality all the other personalities of the earth.
			
  Knowist thou the excellent joys of youth?	  Knowist thou the excellent joys of youth?	  Knowist thou the excellent joys of youth?	  Knowist thou the excellent joys of youth?
  Joys of the dear companions and of the merry word and laughing face?	  Joys of the dear companions and of the merry word and laughing face?	  Joys of the dear companions and of the merry word and laughing face?	  Joys of the dear companions and of the merry word and laughing face?
  Joy of the glad light-beaming day, joy of the wide-breath'd games?	  Joy of the glad light-beaming day, joy of the wide-breath'd games?	  Joy of the glad light-beaming day, joy of the wide-breath'd games?	  Joy of the glad light-beaming day, joy of the wide-breath'd games?
  Joy of sweet music, joy of the lighted ball-room and the dancers?	  Joy of sweet music, joy of the lighted ball-room and the dancers?	  Joy of sweet music, joy of the lighted ball-room and the dancers?	  Joy of sweet music, joy of the lighted ball-room and the dancers?
  Joy of the plenteous dinner, strong carouse and drinking?	  Joy of the plenteous dinner, strong carouse and drinking?	  Joy of the plenteous dinner, strong carouse and drinking?	  Joy of the plenteous dinner, strong carouse and drinking?
			
  Yet O my soul supreme!	  Yet O my soul supreme!	  Yet O my soul supreme!	  Yet O my soul supreme!
  Knowist thou the joys of pensive thought?	  Knowist thou the joys of pensive thought?	  Knowist thou the joys of pensive thought?	  Knowist thou the joys of pensive thought?
  Joys of the free and lonesome heart, the tender, gloomy heart?	  Joys of the free and lonesome heart, the tender, gloomy heart?	  Joys of the free and lonesome heart, the tender, gloomy heart?	  Joys of the free and lonesome heart, the tender, gloomy heart?
  Joys of the solitary walk, the spirit bow'd yet proud, the suffering	  Joys of the solitary walk, the spirit bow'd yet proud, the suffering	  Joys of the solitary walk, the spirit bow'd yet proud, the suffering	  Joys of the solitary walk, the spirit bow'd yet proud, the suffering
      and the struggle?	      and the struggle?	      and the struggle?	      and the struggle?
  The agonistic throes, the ecstasies, joys of the solemn musings day	  The agonistic throes, the ecstasies, joys of the solemn musings day	  The agonistic throes, the ecstasies, joys of the solemn musings day	  The agonistic throes, the ecstasies, joys of the solemn musings day
      or night?	      or night?	      or night?	      or night?
  Joys of the thought of Death, the great spheres Time and Space?	  Joys of the thought of Death, the great spheres Time and Space?	  Joys of the thought of Death, the great spheres Time and Space?	  Joys of the thought of Death, the great spheres Time and Space?
  Prophetic joys of better, loftier love's ideals, the divine wife,	  Prophetic joys of better, loftier love's ideals, the divine wife,	  Prophetic joys of better, loftier love's ideals, the divine wife,	  Prophetic joys of better, loftier love's ideals, the divine wife,
      the sweet, eternal, perfect comrade?	      the sweet, eternal, perfect comrade?	      the sweet, eternal, perfect comrade?	      the sweet, eternal, perfect comrade?
  Joys all thine own undying one, joys worthy thee O soul.	  Joys all thine own undying one, joys worthy thee O soul.	  Joys all thine own undying one, joys worthy thee O soul.	  Joys all thine own undying one, joys worthy thee O soul.
			
  O while I live to be the ruler of life, not a slave,	  O while I live to be the ruler of life, not a slave,	  O while I live to be the ruler of life, not a slave,	  O while I live to be the ruler of life, not a slave,
  To meet life as a powerful conqueror,	  To meet life as a powerful conqueror,	  To meet life as a powerful conqueror,	  To meet life as a powerful conqueror,
  No fumes, no ennui, no more complaints or scornful criticisms,	  No fumes, no ennui, no more complaints or scornful criticisms,	  No fumes, no ennui, no more complaints or scornful criticisms,	  No fumes, no ennui, no more complaints or scornful criticisms,
  To these proud laws of the air, the water and the ground, proving	  To these proud laws of the air, the water and the ground, proving	  To these proud laws of the air, the water and the ground, proving	  To these proud laws of the air, the water and the ground, proving
      my interior soul impregnable,	      my interior soul impregnable,	      my interior soul impregnable,	      my interior soul impregnable,
  And nothing exterior shall ever take command of me.	  And nothing exterior shall ever take command of me.	  And nothing exterior shall ever take command of me.	  And nothing exterior shall ever take command of me.
			
  For not life's joys alone I sing, repeating--the joy of death!	  For not life's joys alone I sing, repeating--the joy of death!	  For not life's joys alone I sing, repeating--the joy of death!	  For not life's joys alone I sing, repeating--the joy of death!
  The beautiful touch of Death, soothing and benumbing a few moments,	  The beautiful touch of Death, soothing and benumbing a few moments,	  The beautiful touch of Death, soothing and benumbing a few moments,	  The beautiful touch of Death, soothing and benumbing a few moments,
      for reasons,	      for reasons,	      for reasons,	      for reasons,
  Myself discharging my excrementitious body to be burn'd, or render'd	  Myself discharging my excrementitious body to be burn'd, or render'd	  Myself discharging my excrementitious body to be burn'd, or render'd	  Myself discharging my excrementitious body to be burn'd, or render'd
      to powder, or buried,	      to powder, or buried,	      to powder, or buried,	      to powder, or buried,
  My real body doubtless left to me for other spheres,	  My real body doubtless left to me for other spheres,	  My real body doubtless left to me for other spheres,	  My real body doubtless left to me for other spheres,
  My voided body nothing more to me, returning to the purifications,	  My voided body nothing more to me, returning to the purifications,	  My voided body nothing more to me, returning to the purifications,	  My voided body nothing more to me, returning to the purifications,
      further offices, eternal uses of the earth.	      further offices, eternal uses of the earth.	      further offices, eternal uses of the earth.	      further offices, eternal uses of the earth.
			
  O to attract by more than attraction!	  O to attract by more than attraction!	  O to attract by more than attraction!	  O to attract by more than attraction!
  How it is I know not--yet behold! the something which obeys none	  How it is I know not--yet behold! the something which obeys none	  How it is I know not--yet behold! the something which obeys none	  How it is I know not--yet behold! the something which obeys none
      of the rest,	      of the rest,	      of the rest,	      of the rest,
  It is offensive, never defensive--yet how magnetic it draws.	  It is offensive, never defensive--yet how magnetic it draws.	  It is offensive, never defensive--yet how magnetic it draws.	  It is offensive, never defensive--yet how magnetic it draws.
			
  O to struggle against great odds, to meet enemies undaunted!	  O to struggle against great odds, to meet enemies undaunted!	  O to struggle against great odds, to meet enemies undaunted!	  O to struggle against great odds, to meet enemies undaunted!
  To be entirely alone with them, to find how much one can stand!	  To be entirely alone with them, to find how much one can stand!	  To be entirely alone with them, to find how much one can stand!	  To be entirely alone with them, to find how much one can stand!
  To look strife, torture, prison, popular odium, face to face!	  To look strife, torture, prison, popular odium, face to face!	  To look strife, torture, prison, popular odium, face to face!	  To look strife, torture, prison, popular odium, face to face!
  To mount the scaffold, to advance to the muzzles of guns with	  To mount the scaffold, to advance to the muzzles of guns with	  To mount the scaffold, to advance to the muzzles of guns with	  To mount the scaffold, to advance to the muzzles of guns with
      perfect nonchalance!	      perfect nonchalance!	      perfect nonchalance!	      perfect nonchalance!
  To be indeed a God!	  To be indeed a God!	  To be indeed a God!	  To be indeed a God!
			
  O to sail to sea in a ship!	  O to sail to sea in a ship!	  O to sail to sea in a ship!	  O to sail to sea in a ship!
  To leave this steady unendurable land,	  To leave this steady unendurable land,	  To leave this steady unendurable land,	  To leave this steady unendurable land,
  To leave the tiresome sameness of the streets, the sidewalks and the	  To leave the tiresome sameness of the streets, the sidewalks and the	  To leave the tiresome sameness of the streets, the sidewalks and the	  To leave the tiresome sameness of the streets, the sidewalks and the
      houses,	      houses,	      houses,	      houses,
  To leave you O you solid motionless land, and entering a ship,	  To leave you O you solid motionless land, and entering a ship,	  To leave you O you solid motionless land, and entering a ship,	  To leave you O you solid motionless land, and entering a ship,
  To sail and sail and sail!	  To sail and sail and sail!	  To sail and sail and sail!	  To sail and sail and sail!
			
  O to have life henceforth a poem of new joys!	  O to have life henceforth a poem of new joys!	  O to have life henceforth a poem of new joys!	  O to have life henceforth a poem of new joys!
  To dance, clap hands, exult, shout, skip, leap, roll on, float on!	  To dance, clap hands, exult, shout, skip, leap, roll on, float on!	  To dance, clap hands, exult, shout, skip, leap, roll on, float on!	  To dance, clap hands, exult, shout, skip, leap, roll on, float on!
  To be a sailor of the world bound for all ports,	  To be a sailor of the world bound for all ports,	  To be a sailor of the world bound for all ports,	  To be a sailor of the world bound for all ports,
  A ship itself, (see indeed these sails I spread to the sun and air,)	  A ship itself, (see indeed these sails I spread to the sun and air,)	  A ship itself, (see indeed these sails I spread to the sun and air,)	  A ship itself, (see indeed these sails I spread to the sun and air,)
  A swift and swelling ship full of rich words, full of joys.	  A swift and swelling ship full of rich words, full of joys.	  A swift and swelling ship full of rich words, full of joys.	  A swift and swelling ship full of rich words, full of joys.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XII	BOOK XII	BOOK XII	BOOK XII
			
			
Song of the Broad-Axe	Song of the Broad-Axe	Song of the Broad-Axe	Song of the Broad-Axe
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Weapon shapely, naked, wan,	  Weapon shapely, naked, wan,	  Weapon shapely, naked, wan,	  Weapon shapely, naked, wan,
  Head from the mother's bowels drawn,	  Head from the mother's bowels drawn,	  Head from the mother's bowels drawn,	  Head from the mother's bowels drawn,
  Wooded flesh and metal bone, limb only one and lip only one,	  Wooded flesh and metal bone, limb only one and lip only one,	  Wooded flesh and metal bone, limb only one and lip only one,	  Wooded flesh and metal bone, limb only one and lip only one,
  Gray-blue leaf by red-heat grown, helve produced from a little seed sown,	  Gray-blue leaf by red-heat grown, helve produced from a little seed sown,	  Gray-blue leaf by red-heat grown, helve produced from a little seed sown,	  Gray-blue leaf by red-heat grown, helve produced from a little seed sown,
  Resting the grass amid and upon,	  Resting the grass amid and upon,	  Resting the grass amid and upon,	  Resting the grass amid and upon,
  To be lean'd and to lean on.	  To be lean'd and to lean on.	  To be lean'd and to lean on.	  To be lean'd and to lean on.
			
  Strong shapes and attributes of strong shapes, masculine trades,	  Strong shapes and attributes of strong shapes, masculine trades,	  Strong shapes and attributes of strong shapes, masculine trades,	  Strong shapes and attributes of strong shapes, masculine trades,
      sights and sounds.	      sights and sounds.	      sights and sounds.	      sights and sounds.
  Long varied train of an emblem, dabs of music,	  Long varied train of an emblem, dabs of music,	  Long varied train of an emblem, dabs of music,	  Long varied train of an emblem, dabs of music,
  Fingers of the organist skipping staccato over the keys of the great organ.	  Fingers of the organist skipping staccato over the keys of the great organ.	  Fingers of the organist skipping staccato over the keys of the great organ.	  Fingers of the organist skipping staccato over the keys of the great organ.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Welcome are all earth's lands, each for its kind,	  Welcome are all earth's lands, each for its kind,	  Welcome are all earth's lands, each for its kind,	  Welcome are all earth's lands, each for its kind,
  Welcome are lands of pine and oak,	  Welcome are lands of pine and oak,	  Welcome are lands of pine and oak,	  Welcome are lands of pine and oak,
  Welcome are lands of the lemon and fig,	  Welcome are lands of the lemon and fig,	  Welcome are lands of the lemon and fig,	  Welcome are lands of the lemon and fig,
  Welcome are lands of gold,	  Welcome are lands of gold,	  Welcome are lands of gold,	  Welcome are lands of gold,
  Welcome are lands of wheat and maize, welcome those of the grape,	  Welcome are lands of wheat and maize, welcome those of the grape,	  Welcome are lands of wheat and maize, welcome those of the grape,	  Welcome are lands of wheat and maize, welcome those of the grape,
  Welcome are lands of sugar and rice,	  Welcome are lands of sugar and rice,	  Welcome are lands of sugar and rice,	  Welcome are lands of sugar and rice,
  Welcome the cotton-lands, welcome those of the white potato and	  Welcome the cotton-lands, welcome those of the white potato and	  Welcome the cotton-lands, welcome those of the white potato and	  Welcome the cotton-lands, welcome those of the white potato and
      sweet potato,	      sweet potato,	      sweet potato,	      sweet potato,
  Welcome are mountains, flats, sands, forests, prairies,	  Welcome are mountains, flats, sands, forests, prairies,	  Welcome are mountains, flats, sands, forests, prairies,	  Welcome are mountains, flats, sands, forests, prairies,
  Welcome the rich borders of rivers, table-lands, openings,	  Welcome the rich borders of rivers, table-lands, openings,	  Welcome the rich borders of rivers, table-lands, openings,	  Welcome the rich borders of rivers, table-lands, openings,
  Welcome the measureless grazing-lands, welcome the teeming soil of	  Welcome the measureless grazing-lands, welcome the teeming soil of	  Welcome the measureless grazing-lands, welcome the teeming soil of	  Welcome the measureless grazing-lands, welcome the teeming soil of
      orchards, flax, honey, hemp;	      orchards, flax, honey, hemp;	      orchards, flax, honey, hemp;	      orchards, flax, honey, hemp;
  Welcome just as much the other more hard-faced lands,	  Welcome just as much the other more hard-faced lands,	  Welcome just as much the other more hard-faced lands,	  Welcome just as much the other more hard-faced lands,
  Lands rich as lands of gold or wheat and fruit lands,	  Lands rich as lands of gold or wheat and fruit lands,	  Lands rich as lands of gold or wheat and fruit lands,	  Lands rich as lands of gold or wheat and fruit lands,
  Lands of mines, lands of the manly and rugged ores,	  Lands of mines, lands of the manly and rugged ores,	  Lands of mines, lands of the manly and rugged ores,	  Lands of mines, lands of the manly and rugged ores,
  Lands of coal, copper, lead, tin, zinc,	  Lands of coal, copper, lead, tin, zinc,	  Lands of coal, copper, lead, tin, zinc,	  Lands of coal, copper, lead, tin, zinc,
  Lands of iron--lands of the make of the axe.	  Lands of iron--lands of the make of the axe.	  Lands of iron--lands of the make of the axe.	  Lands of iron--lands of the make of the axe.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  The log at the wood-pile, the axe supported by it,	  The log at the wood-pile, the axe supported by it,	  The log at the wood-pile, the axe supported by it,	  The log at the wood-pile, the axe supported by it,
  The sylvan hut, the vine over the doorway, the space clear'd for garden,	  The sylvan hut, the vine over the doorway, the space clear'd for garden,	  The sylvan hut, the vine over the doorway, the space clear'd for garden,	  The sylvan hut, the vine over the doorway, the space clear'd for garden,
  The irregular tapping of rain down on the leaves after the storm is lull'd,	  The irregular tapping of rain down on the leaves after the storm is lull'd,	  The irregular tapping of rain down on the leaves after the storm is lull'd,	  The irregular tapping of rain down on the leaves after the storm is lull'd,
  The walling and moaning at intervals, the thought of the sea,	  The walling and moaning at intervals, the thought of the sea,	  The walling and moaning at intervals, the thought of the sea,	  The walling and moaning at intervals, the thought of the sea,
  The thought of ships struck in the storm and put on their beam ends,	  The thought of ships struck in the storm and put on their beam ends,	  The thought of ships struck in the storm and put on their beam ends,	  The thought of ships struck in the storm and put on their beam ends,
      and the cutting away of masts,	      and the cutting away of masts,	      and the cutting away of masts,	      and the cutting away of masts,
  The sentiment of the huge timbers of old-fashion'd houses and barns,	  The sentiment of the huge timbers of old-fashion'd houses and barns,	  The sentiment of the huge timbers of old-fashion'd houses and barns,	  The sentiment of the huge timbers of old-fashion'd houses and barns,
  The remember'd print or narrative, the voyage at a venture of men,	  The remember'd print or narrative, the voyage at a venture of men,	  The remember'd print or narrative, the voyage at a venture of men,	  The remember'd print or narrative, the voyage at a venture of men,
      families, goods,	      families, goods,	      families, goods,	      families, goods,
  The disembarkation, the founding of a new city,	  The disembarkation, the founding of a new city,	  The disembarkation, the founding of a new city,	  The disembarkation, the founding of a new city,
  The voyage of those who sought a New England and found it, the outset	  The voyage of those who sought a New England and found it, the outset	  The voyage of those who sought a New England and found it, the outset	  The voyage of those who sought a New England and found it, the outset
      anywhere,	      anywhere,	      anywhere,	      anywhere,
  The settlements of the Arkansas, Colorado, Ottawa, Willamette,	  The settlements of the Arkansas, Colorado, Ottawa, Willamette,	  The settlements of the Arkansas, Colorado, Ottawa, Willamette,	  The settlements of the Arkansas, Colorado, Ottawa, Willamette,
  The slow progress, the scant fare, the axe, rifle, saddle-bags;	  The slow progress, the scant fare, the axe, rifle, saddle-bags;	  The slow progress, the scant fare, the axe, rifle, saddle-bags;	  The slow progress, the scant fare, the axe, rifle, saddle-bags;
  The beauty of all adventurous and daring persons,	  The beauty of all adventurous and daring persons,	  The beauty of all adventurous and daring persons,	  The beauty of all adventurous and daring persons,
  The beauty of wood-boys and wood-men with their clear untrimm'd faces,	  The beauty of wood-boys and wood-men with their clear untrimm'd faces,	  The beauty of wood-boys and wood-men with their clear untrimm'd faces,	  The beauty of wood-boys and wood-men with their clear untrimm'd faces,
  The beauty of independence, departure, actions that rely on themselves,	  The beauty of independence, departure, actions that rely on themselves,	  The beauty of independence, departure, actions that rely on themselves,	  The beauty of independence, departure, actions that rely on themselves,
  The American contempt for statutes and ceremonies, the boundless	  The American contempt for statutes and ceremonies, the boundless	  The American contempt for statutes and ceremonies, the boundless	  The American contempt for statutes and ceremonies, the boundless
      impatience of restraint,	      impatience of restraint,	      impatience of restraint,	      impatience of restraint,
  The loose drift of character, the inkling through random types, the	  The loose drift of character, the inkling through random types, the	  The loose drift of character, the inkling through random types, the	  The loose drift of character, the inkling through random types, the
      solidification;	      solidification;	      solidification;	      solidification;
  The butcher in the slaughter-house, the hands aboard schooners and	  The butcher in the slaughter-house, the hands aboard schooners and	  The butcher in the slaughter-house, the hands aboard schooners and	  The butcher in the slaughter-house, the hands aboard schooners and
      sloops, the raftsman, the pioneer,	      sloops, the raftsman, the pioneer,	      sloops, the raftsman, the pioneer,	      sloops, the raftsman, the pioneer,
  Lumbermen in their winter camp, daybreak in the woods, stripes of	  Lumbermen in their winter camp, daybreak in the woods, stripes of	  Lumbermen in their winter camp, daybreak in the woods, stripes of	  Lumbermen in their winter camp, daybreak in the woods, stripes of
      snow on the limbs of trees, the occasional snapping,	      snow on the limbs of trees, the occasional snapping,	      snow on the limbs of trees, the occasional snapping,	      snow on the limbs of trees, the occasional snapping,
  The glad clear sound of one's own voice, the merry song, the natural	  The glad clear sound of one's own voice, the merry song, the natural	  The glad clear sound of one's own voice, the merry song, the natural	  The glad clear sound of one's own voice, the merry song, the natural
      life of the woods, the strong day's work,	      life of the woods, the strong day's work,	      life of the woods, the strong day's work,	      life of the woods, the strong day's work,
  The blazing fire at night, the sweet taste of supper, the talk, the	  The blazing fire at night, the sweet taste of supper, the talk, the	  The blazing fire at night, the sweet taste of supper, the talk, the	  The blazing fire at night, the sweet taste of supper, the talk, the
      bed of hemlock-boughs and the bear-skin;	      bed of hemlock-boughs and the bear-skin;	      bed of hemlock-boughs and the bear-skin;	      bed of hemlock-boughs and the bear-skin;
  The house-builder at work in cities or anywhere,	  The house-builder at work in cities or anywhere,	  The house-builder at work in cities or anywhere,	  The house-builder at work in cities or anywhere,
  The preparatory jointing, squaring, sawing, mortising,	  The preparatory jointing, squaring, sawing, mortising,	  The preparatory jointing, squaring, sawing, mortising,	  The preparatory jointing, squaring, sawing, mortising,
  The hoist-up of beams, the push of them in their places, laying them	  The hoist-up of beams, the push of them in their places, laying them	  The hoist-up of beams, the push of them in their places, laying them	  The hoist-up of beams, the push of them in their places, laying them
      regular,	      regular,	      regular,	      regular,
  Setting the studs by their tenons in the mortises according as they	  Setting the studs by their tenons in the mortises according as they	  Setting the studs by their tenons in the mortises according as they	  Setting the studs by their tenons in the mortises according as they
      were prepared,	      were prepared,	      were prepared,	      were prepared,
  The blows of mallets and hammers, the attitudes of the men, their	  The blows of mallets and hammers, the attitudes of the men, their	  The blows of mallets and hammers, the attitudes of the men, their	  The blows of mallets and hammers, the attitudes of the men, their
      curv'd limbs,	      curv'd limbs,	      curv'd limbs,	      curv'd limbs,
  Bending, standing, astride the beams, driving in pins, holding on by	  Bending, standing, astride the beams, driving in pins, holding on by	  Bending, standing, astride the beams, driving in pins, holding on by	  Bending, standing, astride the beams, driving in pins, holding on by
      posts and braces,	      posts and braces,	      posts and braces,	      posts and braces,
  The hook'd arm over the plate, the other arm wielding the axe,	  The hook'd arm over the plate, the other arm wielding the axe,	  The hook'd arm over the plate, the other arm wielding the axe,	  The hook'd arm over the plate, the other arm wielding the axe,
  The floor-men forcing the planks close to be nail'd,	  The floor-men forcing the planks close to be nail'd,	  The floor-men forcing the planks close to be nail'd,	  The floor-men forcing the planks close to be nail'd,
  Their postures bringing their weapons downward on the bearers,	  Their postures bringing their weapons downward on the bearers,	  Their postures bringing their weapons downward on the bearers,	  Their postures bringing their weapons downward on the bearers,
  The echoes resounding through the vacant building:	  The echoes resounding through the vacant building:	  The echoes resounding through the vacant building:	  The echoes resounding through the vacant building:
  The huge storehouse carried up in the city well under way,	  The huge storehouse carried up in the city well under way,	  The huge storehouse carried up in the city well under way,	  The huge storehouse carried up in the city well under way,
  The six framing-men, two in the middle and two at each end, carefully	  The six framing-men, two in the middle and two at each end, carefully	  The six framing-men, two in the middle and two at each end, carefully	  The six framing-men, two in the middle and two at each end, carefully
      bearing on their shoulders a heavy stick for a cross-beam,	      bearing on their shoulders a heavy stick for a cross-beam,	      bearing on their shoulders a heavy stick for a cross-beam,	      bearing on their shoulders a heavy stick for a cross-beam,
  The crowded line of masons with trowels in their right hands rapidly	  The crowded line of masons with trowels in their right hands rapidly	  The crowded line of masons with trowels in their right hands rapidly	  The crowded line of masons with trowels in their right hands rapidly
      laying the long side-wall, two hundred feet from front to rear,	      laying the long side-wall, two hundred feet from front to rear,	      laying the long side-wall, two hundred feet from front to rear,	      laying the long side-wall, two hundred feet from front to rear,
  The flexible rise and fall of backs, the continual click of the	  The flexible rise and fall of backs, the continual click of the	  The flexible rise and fall of backs, the continual click of the	  The flexible rise and fall of backs, the continual click of the
      trowels striking the bricks,	      trowels striking the bricks,	      trowels striking the bricks,	      trowels striking the bricks,
  The bricks one after another each laid so workmanlike in its place,	  The bricks one after another each laid so workmanlike in its place,	  The bricks one after another each laid so workmanlike in its place,	  The bricks one after another each laid so workmanlike in its place,
      and set with a knock of the trowel-handle,	      and set with a knock of the trowel-handle,	      and set with a knock of the trowel-handle,	      and set with a knock of the trowel-handle,
  The piles of materials, the mortar on the mortar-boards, and the	  The piles of materials, the mortar on the mortar-boards, and the	  The piles of materials, the mortar on the mortar-boards, and the	  The piles of materials, the mortar on the mortar-boards, and the
      steady replenishing by the hod-men;	      steady replenishing by the hod-men;	      steady replenishing by the hod-men;	      steady replenishing by the hod-men;
  Spar-makers in the spar-yard, the swarming row of well-grown apprentices,	  Spar-makers in the spar-yard, the swarming row of well-grown apprentices,	  Spar-makers in the spar-yard, the swarming row of well-grown apprentices,	  Spar-makers in the spar-yard, the swarming row of well-grown apprentices,
  The swing of their axes on the square-hew'd log shaping it toward	  The swing of their axes on the square-hew'd log shaping it toward	  The swing of their axes on the square-hew'd log shaping it toward	  The swing of their axes on the square-hew'd log shaping it toward
      the shape of a mast,	      the shape of a mast,	      the shape of a mast,	      the shape of a mast,
  The brisk short crackle of the steel driven slantingly into the pine,	  The brisk short crackle of the steel driven slantingly into the pine,	  The brisk short crackle of the steel driven slantingly into the pine,	  The brisk short crackle of the steel driven slantingly into the pine,
  The butter-color'd chips flying off in great flakes and slivers,	  The butter-color'd chips flying off in great flakes and slivers,	  The butter-color'd chips flying off in great flakes and slivers,	  The butter-color'd chips flying off in great flakes and slivers,
  The limber motion of brawny young arms and hips in easy costumes,	  The limber motion of brawny young arms and hips in easy costumes,	  The limber motion of brawny young arms and hips in easy costumes,	  The limber motion of brawny young arms and hips in easy costumes,
  The constructor of wharves, bridges, piers, bulk-heads, floats,	  The constructor of wharves, bridges, piers, bulk-heads, floats,	  The constructor of wharves, bridges, piers, bulk-heads, floats,	  The constructor of wharves, bridges, piers, bulk-heads, floats,
      stays against the sea;	      stays against the sea;	      stays against the sea;	      stays against the sea;
  The city fireman, the fire that suddenly bursts forth in the	  The city fireman, the fire that suddenly bursts forth in the	  The city fireman, the fire that suddenly bursts forth in the	  The city fireman, the fire that suddenly bursts forth in the
      close-pack'd square,	      close-pack'd square,	      close-pack'd square,	      close-pack'd square,
  The arriving engines, the hoarse shouts, the nimble stepping and daring,	  The arriving engines, the hoarse shouts, the nimble stepping and daring,	  The arriving engines, the hoarse shouts, the nimble stepping and daring,	  The arriving engines, the hoarse shouts, the nimble stepping and daring,
  The strong command through the fire-trumpets, the falling in line,	  The strong command through the fire-trumpets, the falling in line,	  The strong command through the fire-trumpets, the falling in line,	  The strong command through the fire-trumpets, the falling in line,
      the rise and fall of the arms forcing the water,	      the rise and fall of the arms forcing the water,	      the rise and fall of the arms forcing the water,	      the rise and fall of the arms forcing the water,
  The slender, spasmic, blue-white jets, the bringing to bear of the	  The slender, spasmic, blue-white jets, the bringing to bear of the	  The slender, spasmic, blue-white jets, the bringing to bear of the	  The slender, spasmic, blue-white jets, the bringing to bear of the
      hooks and ladders and their execution,	      hooks and ladders and their execution,	      hooks and ladders and their execution,	      hooks and ladders and their execution,
  The crash and cut away of connecting wood-work, or through floors	  The crash and cut away of connecting wood-work, or through floors	  The crash and cut away of connecting wood-work, or through floors	  The crash and cut away of connecting wood-work, or through floors
      if the fire smoulders under them,	      if the fire smoulders under them,	      if the fire smoulders under them,	      if the fire smoulders under them,
  The crowd with their lit faces watching, the glare and dense shadows;	  The crowd with their lit faces watching, the glare and dense shadows;	  The crowd with their lit faces watching, the glare and dense shadows;	  The crowd with their lit faces watching, the glare and dense shadows;
  The forger at his forge-furnace and the user of iron after him,	  The forger at his forge-furnace and the user of iron after him,	  The forger at his forge-furnace and the user of iron after him,	  The forger at his forge-furnace and the user of iron after him,
  The maker of the axe large and small, and the welder and temperer,	  The maker of the axe large and small, and the welder and temperer,	  The maker of the axe large and small, and the welder and temperer,	  The maker of the axe large and small, and the welder and temperer,
  The chooser breathing his breath on the cold steel and trying the	  The chooser breathing his breath on the cold steel and trying the	  The chooser breathing his breath on the cold steel and trying the	  The chooser breathing his breath on the cold steel and trying the
      edge with his thumb,	      edge with his thumb,	      edge with his thumb,	      edge with his thumb,
  The one who clean-shapes the handle and sets it firmly in the socket;	  The one who clean-shapes the handle and sets it firmly in the socket;	  The one who clean-shapes the handle and sets it firmly in the socket;	  The one who clean-shapes the handle and sets it firmly in the socket;
  The shadowy processions of the portraits of the past users also,	  The shadowy processions of the portraits of the past users also,	  The shadowy processions of the portraits of the past users also,	  The shadowy processions of the portraits of the past users also,
  The primal patient mechanics, the architects and engineers,	  The primal patient mechanics, the architects and engineers,	  The primal patient mechanics, the architects and engineers,	  The primal patient mechanics, the architects and engineers,
  The far-off Assyrian edifice and Mizra edifice,	  The far-off Assyrian edifice and Mizra edifice,	  The far-off Assyrian edifice and Mizra edifice,	  The far-off Assyrian edifice and Mizra edifice,
  The Roman lictors preceding the consuls,	  The Roman lictors preceding the consuls,	  The Roman lictors preceding the consuls,	  The Roman lictors preceding the consuls,
  The antique European warrior with his axe in combat,	  The antique European warrior with his axe in combat,	  The antique European warrior with his axe in combat,	  The antique European warrior with his axe in combat,
  The uplifted arm, the clatter of blows on the helmeted head,	  The uplifted arm, the clatter of blows on the helmeted head,	  The uplifted arm, the clatter of blows on the helmeted head,	  The uplifted arm, the clatter of blows on the helmeted head,
  The death-howl, the limpsy tumbling body, the rush of friend and foe	  The death-howl, the limpsy tumbling body, the rush of friend and foe	  The death-howl, the limpsy tumbling body, the rush of friend and foe	  The death-howl, the limpsy tumbling body, the rush of friend and foe
      thither,	      thither,	      thither,	      thither,
  The siege of revolted lieges determin'd for liberty,	  The siege of revolted lieges determin'd for liberty,	  The siege of revolted lieges determin'd for liberty,	  The siege of revolted lieges determin'd for liberty,
  The summons to surrender, the battering at castle gates, the truce	  The summons to surrender, the battering at castle gates, the truce	  The summons to surrender, the battering at castle gates, the truce	  The summons to surrender, the battering at castle gates, the truce
      and parley,	      and parley,	      and parley,	      and parley,
  The sack of an old city in its time,	  The sack of an old city in its time,	  The sack of an old city in its time,	  The sack of an old city in its time,
  The bursting in of mercenaries and bigots tumultuously and disorderly,	  The bursting in of mercenaries and bigots tumultuously and disorderly,	  The bursting in of mercenaries and bigots tumultuously and disorderly,	  The bursting in of mercenaries and bigots tumultuously and disorderly,
  Roar, flames, blood, drunkenness, madness,	  Roar, flames, blood, drunkenness, madness,	  Roar, flames, blood, drunkenness, madness,	  Roar, flames, blood, drunkenness, madness,
  Goods freely rifled from houses and temples, screams of women in the	  Goods freely rifled from houses and temples, screams of women in the	  Goods freely rifled from houses and temples, screams of women in the	  Goods freely rifled from houses and temples, screams of women in the
      gripe of brigands,	      gripe of brigands,	      gripe of brigands,	      gripe of brigands,
  Craft and thievery of camp-followers, men running, old persons despairing,	  Craft and thievery of camp-followers, men running, old persons despairing,	  Craft and thievery of camp-followers, men running, old persons despairing,	  Craft and thievery of camp-followers, men running, old persons despairing,
  The hell of war, the cruelties of creeds,	  The hell of war, the cruelties of creeds,	  The hell of war, the cruelties of creeds,	  The hell of war, the cruelties of creeds,
  The list of all executive deeds and words just or unjust,	  The list of all executive deeds and words just or unjust,	  The list of all executive deeds and words just or unjust,	  The list of all executive deeds and words just or unjust,
  The power of personality just or unjust.	  The power of personality just or unjust.	  The power of personality just or unjust.	  The power of personality just or unjust.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Muscle and pluck forever!	  Muscle and pluck forever!	  Muscle and pluck forever!	  Muscle and pluck forever!
  What invigorates life invigorates death,	  What invigorates life invigorates death,	  What invigorates life invigorates death,	  What invigorates life invigorates death,
  And the dead advance as much as the living advance,	  And the dead advance as much as the living advance,	  And the dead advance as much as the living advance,	  And the dead advance as much as the living advance,
  And the future is no more uncertain than the present,	  And the future is no more uncertain than the present,	  And the future is no more uncertain than the present,	  And the future is no more uncertain than the present,
  For the roughness of the earth and of man encloses as much as the	  For the roughness of the earth and of man encloses as much as the	  For the roughness of the earth and of man encloses as much as the	  For the roughness of the earth and of man encloses as much as the
      delicatesse of the earth and of man,	      delicatesse of the earth and of man,	      delicatesse of the earth and of man,	      delicatesse of the earth and of man,
  And nothing endures but personal qualities.	  And nothing endures but personal qualities.	  And nothing endures but personal qualities.	  And nothing endures but personal qualities.
			
  What do you think endures?	  What do you think endures?	  What do you think endures?	  What do you think endures?
  Do you think a great city endures?	  Do you think a great city endures?	  Do you think a great city endures?	  Do you think a great city endures?
  Or a teeming manufacturing state? or a prepared constitution? or the	  Or a teeming manufacturing state? or a prepared constitution? or the	  Or a teeming manufacturing state? or a prepared constitution? or the	  Or a teeming manufacturing state? or a prepared constitution? or the
      best built steamships?	      best built steamships?	      best built steamships?	      best built steamships?
  Or hotels of granite and iron? or any chef-d'oeuvres of engineering,	  Or hotels of granite and iron? or any chef-d'oeuvres of engineering,	  Or hotels of granite and iron? or any chef-d'oeuvres of engineering,	  Or hotels of granite and iron? or any chef-d'oeuvres of engineering,
      forts, armaments?	      forts, armaments?	      forts, armaments?	      forts, armaments?
			
  Away! these are not to be cherish'd for themselves,	  Away! these are not to be cherish'd for themselves,	  Away! these are not to be cherish'd for themselves,	  Away! these are not to be cherish'd for themselves,
  They fill their hour, the dancers dance, the musicians play for them,	  They fill their hour, the dancers dance, the musicians play for them,	  They fill their hour, the dancers dance, the musicians play for them,	  They fill their hour, the dancers dance, the musicians play for them,
  The show passes, all does well enough of course,	  The show passes, all does well enough of course,	  The show passes, all does well enough of course,	  The show passes, all does well enough of course,
  All does very well till one flash of defiance.	  All does very well till one flash of defiance.	  All does very well till one flash of defiance.	  All does very well till one flash of defiance.
			
  A great city is that which has the greatest men and women,	  A great city is that which has the greatest men and women,	  A great city is that which has the greatest men and women,	  A great city is that which has the greatest men and women,
  If it be a few ragged huts it is still the greatest city in the	  If it be a few ragged huts it is still the greatest city in the	  If it be a few ragged huts it is still the greatest city in the	  If it be a few ragged huts it is still the greatest city in the
      whole world.	      whole world.	      whole world.	      whole world.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  The place where a great city stands is not the place of stretch'd	  The place where a great city stands is not the place of stretch'd	  The place where a great city stands is not the place of stretch'd	  The place where a great city stands is not the place of stretch'd
      wharves, docks, manufactures, deposits of produce merely,	      wharves, docks, manufactures, deposits of produce merely,	      wharves, docks, manufactures, deposits of produce merely,	      wharves, docks, manufactures, deposits of produce merely,
  Nor the place of ceaseless salutes of new-comers or the	  Nor the place of ceaseless salutes of new-comers or the	  Nor the place of ceaseless salutes of new-comers or the	  Nor the place of ceaseless salutes of new-comers or the
      anchor-lifters of the departing,	      anchor-lifters of the departing,	      anchor-lifters of the departing,	      anchor-lifters of the departing,
  Nor the place of the tallest and costliest buildings or shops	  Nor the place of the tallest and costliest buildings or shops	  Nor the place of the tallest and costliest buildings or shops	  Nor the place of the tallest and costliest buildings or shops
      selling goods from the rest of the earth,	      selling goods from the rest of the earth,	      selling goods from the rest of the earth,	      selling goods from the rest of the earth,
  Nor the place of the best libraries and schools, nor the place where	  Nor the place of the best libraries and schools, nor the place where	  Nor the place of the best libraries and schools, nor the place where	  Nor the place of the best libraries and schools, nor the place where
      money is plentiest,	      money is plentiest,	      money is plentiest,	      money is plentiest,
  Nor the place of the most numerous population.	  Nor the place of the most numerous population.	  Nor the place of the most numerous population.	  Nor the place of the most numerous population.
			
  Where the city stands with the brawniest breed of orators and bards,	  Where the city stands with the brawniest breed of orators and bards,	  Where the city stands with the brawniest breed of orators and bards,	  Where the city stands with the brawniest breed of orators and bards,
  Where the city stands that is belov'd by these, and loves them in	  Where the city stands that is belov'd by these, and loves them in	  Where the city stands that is belov'd by these, and loves them in	  Where the city stands that is belov'd by these, and loves them in
      return and understands them,	      return and understands them,	      return and understands them,	      return and understands them,
  Where no monuments exist to heroes but in the common words and deeds,	  Where no monuments exist to heroes but in the common words and deeds,	  Where no monuments exist to heroes but in the common words and deeds,	  Where no monuments exist to heroes but in the common words and deeds,
  Where thrift is in its place, and prudence is in its place,	  Where thrift is in its place, and prudence is in its place,	  Where thrift is in its place, and prudence is in its place,	  Where thrift is in its place, and prudence is in its place,
  Where the men and women think lightly of the laws,	  Where the men and women think lightly of the laws,	  Where the men and women think lightly of the laws,	  Where the men and women think lightly of the laws,
  Where the slave ceases, and the master of slaves ceases,	  Where the slave ceases, and the master of slaves ceases,	  Where the slave ceases, and the master of slaves ceases,	  Where the slave ceases, and the master of slaves ceases,
  Where the populace rise at once against the never-ending audacity of	  Where the populace rise at once against the never-ending audacity of	  Where the populace rise at once against the never-ending audacity of	  Where the populace rise at once against the never-ending audacity of
      elected persons,	      elected persons,	      elected persons,	      elected persons,
  Where fierce men and women pour forth as the sea to the whistle of	  Where fierce men and women pour forth as the sea to the whistle of	  Where fierce men and women pour forth as the sea to the whistle of	  Where fierce men and women pour forth as the sea to the whistle of
      death pours its sweeping and unript waves,	      death pours its sweeping and unript waves,	      death pours its sweeping and unript waves,	      death pours its sweeping and unript waves,
  Where outside authority enters always after the precedence of inside	  Where outside authority enters always after the precedence of inside	  Where outside authority enters always after the precedence of inside	  Where outside authority enters always after the precedence of inside
      authority,	      authority,	      authority,	      authority,
  Where the citizen is always the head and ideal, and President,	  Where the citizen is always the head and ideal, and President,	  Where the citizen is always the head and ideal, and President,	  Where the citizen is always the head and ideal, and President,
      Mayor, Governor and what not, are agents for pay,	      Mayor, Governor and what not, are agents for pay,	      Mayor, Governor and what not, are agents for pay,	      Mayor, Governor and what not, are agents for pay,
  Where children are taught to be laws to themselves, and to depend on	  Where children are taught to be laws to themselves, and to depend on	  Where children are taught to be laws to themselves, and to depend on	  Where children are taught to be laws to themselves, and to depend on
      themselves,	      themselves,	      themselves,	      themselves,
  Where equanimity is illustrated in affairs,	  Where equanimity is illustrated in affairs,	  Where equanimity is illustrated in affairs,	  Where equanimity is illustrated in affairs,
  Where speculations on the soul are encouraged,	  Where speculations on the soul are encouraged,	  Where speculations on the soul are encouraged,	  Where speculations on the soul are encouraged,
  Where women walk in public processions in the streets the same as the men,	  Where women walk in public processions in the streets the same as the men,	  Where women walk in public processions in the streets the same as the men,	  Where women walk in public processions in the streets the same as the men,
  Where they enter the public assembly and take places the same as the men;	  Where they enter the public assembly and take places the same as the men;	  Where they enter the public assembly and take places the same as the men;	  Where they enter the public assembly and take places the same as the men;
  Where the city of the faithfulest friends stands,	  Where the city of the faithfulest friends stands,	  Where the city of the faithfulest friends stands,	  Where the city of the faithfulest friends stands,
  Where the city of the cleanliness of the sexes stands,	  Where the city of the cleanliness of the sexes stands,	  Where the city of the cleanliness of the sexes stands,	  Where the city of the cleanliness of the sexes stands,
  Where the city of the healthiest fathers stands,	  Where the city of the healthiest fathers stands,	  Where the city of the healthiest fathers stands,	  Where the city of the healthiest fathers stands,
  Where the city of the best-bodied mothers stands,	  Where the city of the best-bodied mothers stands,	  Where the city of the best-bodied mothers stands,	  Where the city of the best-bodied mothers stands,
  There the great city stands.	  There the great city stands.	  There the great city stands.	  There the great city stands.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  How beggarly appear arguments before a defiant deed!	  How beggarly appear arguments before a defiant deed!	  How beggarly appear arguments before a defiant deed!	  How beggarly appear arguments before a defiant deed!
  How the floridness of the materials of cities shrivels before a	  How the floridness of the materials of cities shrivels before a	  How the floridness of the materials of cities shrivels before a	  How the floridness of the materials of cities shrivels before a
      man's or woman's look!	      man's or woman's look!	      man's or woman's look!	      man's or woman's look!
			
  All waits or goes by default till a strong being appears;	  All waits or goes by default till a strong being appears;	  All waits or goes by default till a strong being appears;	  All waits or goes by default till a strong being appears;
  A strong being is the proof of the race and of the ability of the universe,	  A strong being is the proof of the race and of the ability of the universe,	  A strong being is the proof of the race and of the ability of the universe,	  A strong being is the proof of the race and of the ability of the universe,
  When he or she appears materials are overaw'd,	  When he or she appears materials are overaw'd,	  When he or she appears materials are overaw'd,	  When he or she appears materials are overaw'd,
  The dispute on the soul stops,	  The dispute on the soul stops,	  The dispute on the soul stops,	  The dispute on the soul stops,
  The old customs and phrases are confronted, turn'd back, or laid away.	  The old customs and phrases are confronted, turn'd back, or laid away.	  The old customs and phrases are confronted, turn'd back, or laid away.	  The old customs and phrases are confronted, turn'd back, or laid away.
			
  What is your money-making now? what can it do now?	  What is your money-making now? what can it do now?	  What is your money-making now? what can it do now?	  What is your money-making now? what can it do now?
  What is your respectability now?	  What is your respectability now?	  What is your respectability now?	  What is your respectability now?
  What are your theology, tuition, society, traditions, statute-books, now?	  What are your theology, tuition, society, traditions, statute-books, now?	  What are your theology, tuition, society, traditions, statute-books, now?	  What are your theology, tuition, society, traditions, statute-books, now?
  Where are your jibes of being now?	  Where are your jibes of being now?	  Where are your jibes of being now?	  Where are your jibes of being now?
  Where are your cavils about the soul now?	  Where are your cavils about the soul now?	  Where are your cavils about the soul now?	  Where are your cavils about the soul now?
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  A sterile landscape covers the ore, there is as good as the best for	  A sterile landscape covers the ore, there is as good as the best for	  A sterile landscape covers the ore, there is as good as the best for	  A sterile landscape covers the ore, there is as good as the best for
      all the forbidding appearance,	      all the forbidding appearance,	      all the forbidding appearance,	      all the forbidding appearance,
  There is the mine, there are the miners,	  There is the mine, there are the miners,	  There is the mine, there are the miners,	  There is the mine, there are the miners,
  The forge-furnace is there, the melt is accomplish'd, the hammersmen	  The forge-furnace is there, the melt is accomplish'd, the hammersmen	  The forge-furnace is there, the melt is accomplish'd, the hammersmen	  The forge-furnace is there, the melt is accomplish'd, the hammersmen
      are at hand with their tongs and hammers,	      are at hand with their tongs and hammers,	      are at hand with their tongs and hammers,	      are at hand with their tongs and hammers,
  What always served and always serves is at hand.	  What always served and always serves is at hand.	  What always served and always serves is at hand.	  What always served and always serves is at hand.
			
  Than this nothing has better served, it has served all,	  Than this nothing has better served, it has served all,	  Than this nothing has better served, it has served all,	  Than this nothing has better served, it has served all,
  Served the fluent-tongued and subtle-sensed Greek, and long ere the Greek,	  Served the fluent-tongued and subtle-sensed Greek, and long ere the Greek,	  Served the fluent-tongued and subtle-sensed Greek, and long ere the Greek,	  Served the fluent-tongued and subtle-sensed Greek, and long ere the Greek,
  Served in building the buildings that last longer than any,	  Served in building the buildings that last longer than any,	  Served in building the buildings that last longer than any,	  Served in building the buildings that last longer than any,
  Served the Hebrew, the Persian, the most ancient Hindustanee,	  Served the Hebrew, the Persian, the most ancient Hindustanee,	  Served the Hebrew, the Persian, the most ancient Hindustanee,	  Served the Hebrew, the Persian, the most ancient Hindustanee,
  Served the mound-raiser on the Mississippi, served those whose	  Served the mound-raiser on the Mississippi, served those whose	  Served the mound-raiser on the Mississippi, served those whose	  Served the mound-raiser on the Mississippi, served those whose
      relics remain in Central America,	      relics remain in Central America,	      relics remain in Central America,	      relics remain in Central America,
  Served Albic temples in woods or on plains, with unhewn pillars and	  Served Albic temples in woods or on plains, with unhewn pillars and	  Served Albic temples in woods or on plains, with unhewn pillars and	  Served Albic temples in woods or on plains, with unhewn pillars and
      the druids,	      the druids,	      the druids,	      the druids,
  Served the artificial clefts, vast, high, silent, on the	  Served the artificial clefts, vast, high, silent, on the	  Served the artificial clefts, vast, high, silent, on the	  Served the artificial clefts, vast, high, silent, on the
      snow-cover'd hills of Scandinavia,	      snow-cover'd hills of Scandinavia,	      snow-cover'd hills of Scandinavia,	      snow-cover'd hills of Scandinavia,
  Served those who time out of mind made on the granite walls rough	  Served those who time out of mind made on the granite walls rough	  Served those who time out of mind made on the granite walls rough	  Served those who time out of mind made on the granite walls rough
      sketches of the sun, moon, stars, ships, ocean waves,	      sketches of the sun, moon, stars, ships, ocean waves,	      sketches of the sun, moon, stars, ships, ocean waves,	      sketches of the sun, moon, stars, ships, ocean waves,
  Served the paths of the irruptions of the Goths, served the pastoral	  Served the paths of the irruptions of the Goths, served the pastoral	  Served the paths of the irruptions of the Goths, served the pastoral	  Served the paths of the irruptions of the Goths, served the pastoral
      tribes and nomads,	      tribes and nomads,	      tribes and nomads,	      tribes and nomads,
  Served the long distant Kelt, served the hardy pirates of the Baltic,	  Served the long distant Kelt, served the hardy pirates of the Baltic,	  Served the long distant Kelt, served the hardy pirates of the Baltic,	  Served the long distant Kelt, served the hardy pirates of the Baltic,
  Served before any of those the venerable and harmless men of Ethiopia,	  Served before any of those the venerable and harmless men of Ethiopia,	  Served before any of those the venerable and harmless men of Ethiopia,	  Served before any of those the venerable and harmless men of Ethiopia,
  Served the making of helms for the galleys of pleasure and the	  Served the making of helms for the galleys of pleasure and the	  Served the making of helms for the galleys of pleasure and the	  Served the making of helms for the galleys of pleasure and the
      making of those for war,	      making of those for war,	      making of those for war,	      making of those for war,
  Served all great works on land and all great works on the sea,	  Served all great works on land and all great works on the sea,	  Served all great works on land and all great works on the sea,	  Served all great works on land and all great works on the sea,
  For the mediaeval ages and before the mediaeval ages,	  For the mediaeval ages and before the mediaeval ages,	  For the mediaeval ages and before the mediaeval ages,	  For the mediaeval ages and before the mediaeval ages,
  Served not the living only then as now, but served the dead.	  Served not the living only then as now, but served the dead.	  Served not the living only then as now, but served the dead.	  Served not the living only then as now, but served the dead.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  I see the European headsman,	  I see the European headsman,	  I see the European headsman,	  I see the European headsman,
  He stands mask'd, clothed in red, with huge legs and strong naked arms,	  He stands mask'd, clothed in red, with huge legs and strong naked arms,	  He stands mask'd, clothed in red, with huge legs and strong naked arms,	  He stands mask'd, clothed in red, with huge legs and strong naked arms,
  And leans on a ponderous axe.	  And leans on a ponderous axe.	  And leans on a ponderous axe.	  And leans on a ponderous axe.
			
  (Whom have you slaughter'd lately European headsman?	  (Whom have you slaughter'd lately European headsman?	  (Whom have you slaughter'd lately European headsman?	  (Whom have you slaughter'd lately European headsman?
  Whose is that blood upon you so wet and sticky?)	  Whose is that blood upon you so wet and sticky?)	  Whose is that blood upon you so wet and sticky?)	  Whose is that blood upon you so wet and sticky?)
			
  I see the clear sunsets of the martyrs,	  I see the clear sunsets of the martyrs,	  I see the clear sunsets of the martyrs,	  I see the clear sunsets of the martyrs,
  I see from the scaffolds the descending ghosts,	  I see from the scaffolds the descending ghosts,	  I see from the scaffolds the descending ghosts,	  I see from the scaffolds the descending ghosts,
  Ghosts of dead lords, uncrown'd ladies, impeach'd ministers, rejected kings,	  Ghosts of dead lords, uncrown'd ladies, impeach'd ministers, rejected kings,	  Ghosts of dead lords, uncrown'd ladies, impeach'd ministers, rejected kings,	  Ghosts of dead lords, uncrown'd ladies, impeach'd ministers, rejected kings,
  Rivals, traitors, poisoners, disgraced chieftains and the rest.	  Rivals, traitors, poisoners, disgraced chieftains and the rest.	  Rivals, traitors, poisoners, disgraced chieftains and the rest.	  Rivals, traitors, poisoners, disgraced chieftains and the rest.
			
  I see those who in any land have died for the good cause,	  I see those who in any land have died for the good cause,	  I see those who in any land have died for the good cause,	  I see those who in any land have died for the good cause,
  The seed is spare, nevertheless the crop shall never run out,	  The seed is spare, nevertheless the crop shall never run out,	  The seed is spare, nevertheless the crop shall never run out,	  The seed is spare, nevertheless the crop shall never run out,
  (Mind you O foreign kings, O priests, the crop shall never run out.)	  (Mind you O foreign kings, O priests, the crop shall never run out.)	  (Mind you O foreign kings, O priests, the crop shall never run out.)	  (Mind you O foreign kings, O priests, the crop shall never run out.)
			
  I see the blood wash'd entirely away from the axe,	  I see the blood wash'd entirely away from the axe,	  I see the blood wash'd entirely away from the axe,	  I see the blood wash'd entirely away from the axe,
  Both blade and helve are clean,	  Both blade and helve are clean,	  Both blade and helve are clean,	  Both blade and helve are clean,
  They spirt no more the blood of European nobles, they clasp no more	  They spirt no more the blood of European nobles, they clasp no more	  They spirt no more the blood of European nobles, they clasp no more	  They spirt no more the blood of European nobles, they clasp no more
      the necks of queens.	      the necks of queens.	      the necks of queens.	      the necks of queens.
			
  I see the headsman withdraw and become useless,	  I see the headsman withdraw and become useless,	  I see the headsman withdraw and become useless,	  I see the headsman withdraw and become useless,
  I see the scaffold untrodden and mouldy, I see no longer any axe upon it,	  I see the scaffold untrodden and mouldy, I see no longer any axe upon it,	  I see the scaffold untrodden and mouldy, I see no longer any axe upon it,	  I see the scaffold untrodden and mouldy, I see no longer any axe upon it,
			
  I see the mighty and friendly emblem of the power of my own race,	  I see the mighty and friendly emblem of the power of my own race,	  I see the mighty and friendly emblem of the power of my own race,	  I see the mighty and friendly emblem of the power of my own race,
      the newest, largest race.	      the newest, largest race.	      the newest, largest race.	      the newest, largest race.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  (America! I do not vaunt my love for you,	  (America! I do not vaunt my love for you,	  (America! I do not vaunt my love for you,	  (America! I do not vaunt my love for you,
  I have what I have.)	  I have what I have.)	  I have what I have.)	  I have what I have.)
			
  The axe leaps!	  The axe leaps!	  The axe leaps!	  The axe leaps!
  The solid forest gives fluid utterances,	  The solid forest gives fluid utterances,	  The solid forest gives fluid utterances,	  The solid forest gives fluid utterances,
  They tumble forth, they rise and form,	  They tumble forth, they rise and form,	  They tumble forth, they rise and form,	  They tumble forth, they rise and form,
  Hut, tent, landing, survey,	  Hut, tent, landing, survey,	  Hut, tent, landing, survey,	  Hut, tent, landing, survey,
  Flail, plough, pick, crowbar, spade,	  Flail, plough, pick, crowbar, spade,	  Flail, plough, pick, crowbar, spade,	  Flail, plough, pick, crowbar, spade,
  Shingle, rail, prop, wainscot, lamb, lath, panel, gable,	  Shingle, rail, prop, wainscot, lamb, lath, panel, gable,	  Shingle, rail, prop, wainscot, lamb, lath, panel, gable,	  Shingle, rail, prop, wainscot, lamb, lath, panel, gable,
  Citadel, ceiling, saloon, academy, organ, exhibition-house, library,	  Citadel, ceiling, saloon, academy, organ, exhibition-house, library,	  Citadel, ceiling, saloon, academy, organ, exhibition-house, library,	  Citadel, ceiling, saloon, academy, organ, exhibition-house, library,
  Cornice, trellis, pilaster, balcony, window, turret, porch,	  Cornice, trellis, pilaster, balcony, window, turret, porch,	  Cornice, trellis, pilaster, balcony, window, turret, porch,	  Cornice, trellis, pilaster, balcony, window, turret, porch,
  Hoe, rake, pitchfork, pencil, wagon, staff, saw, jack-plane, mallet,	  Hoe, rake, pitchfork, pencil, wagon, staff, saw, jack-plane, mallet,	  Hoe, rake, pitchfork, pencil, wagon, staff, saw, jack-plane, mallet,	  Hoe, rake, pitchfork, pencil, wagon, staff, saw, jack-plane, mallet,
      wedge, rounce,	      wedge, rounce,	      wedge, rounce,	      wedge, rounce,
  Chair, tub, hoop, table, wicket, vane, sash, floor,	  Chair, tub, hoop, table, wicket, vane, sash, floor,	  Chair, tub, hoop, table, wicket, vane, sash, floor,	  Chair, tub, hoop, table, wicket, vane, sash, floor,
  Work-box, chest, string'd instrument, boat, frame, and what not,	  Work-box, chest, string'd instrument, boat, frame, and what not,	  Work-box, chest, string'd instrument, boat, frame, and what not,	  Work-box, chest, string'd instrument, boat, frame, and what not,
  Capitols of States, and capitol of the nation of States,	  Capitols of States, and capitol of the nation of States,	  Capitols of States, and capitol of the nation of States,	  Capitols of States, and capitol of the nation of States,
  Long stately rows in avenues, hospitals for orphans or for the poor or sick,	  Long stately rows in avenues, hospitals for orphans or for the poor or sick,	  Long stately rows in avenues, hospitals for orphans or for the poor or sick,	  Long stately rows in avenues, hospitals for orphans or for the poor or sick,
  Manhattan steamboats and clippers taking the measure of all seas.	  Manhattan steamboats and clippers taking the measure of all seas.	  Manhattan steamboats and clippers taking the measure of all seas.	  Manhattan steamboats and clippers taking the measure of all seas.
			
  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!
  Shapes of the using of axes anyhow, and the users and all that	  Shapes of the using of axes anyhow, and the users and all that	  Shapes of the using of axes anyhow, and the users and all that	  Shapes of the using of axes anyhow, and the users and all that
      neighbors them,	      neighbors them,	      neighbors them,	      neighbors them,
  Cutters down of wood and haulers of it to the Penobscot or Kenebec,	  Cutters down of wood and haulers of it to the Penobscot or Kenebec,	  Cutters down of wood and haulers of it to the Penobscot or Kenebec,	  Cutters down of wood and haulers of it to the Penobscot or Kenebec,
  Dwellers in cabins among the Californian mountains or by the little	  Dwellers in cabins among the Californian mountains or by the little	  Dwellers in cabins among the Californian mountains or by the little	  Dwellers in cabins among the Californian mountains or by the little
      lakes, or on the Columbia,	      lakes, or on the Columbia,	      lakes, or on the Columbia,	      lakes, or on the Columbia,
  Dwellers south on the banks of the Gila or Rio Grande, friendly	  Dwellers south on the banks of the Gila or Rio Grande, friendly	  Dwellers south on the banks of the Gila or Rio Grande, friendly	  Dwellers south on the banks of the Gila or Rio Grande, friendly
      gatherings, the characters and fun,	      gatherings, the characters and fun,	      gatherings, the characters and fun,	      gatherings, the characters and fun,
  Dwellers along the St. Lawrence, or north in Kanada, or down by the	  Dwellers along the St. Lawrence, or north in Kanada, or down by the	  Dwellers along the St. Lawrence, or north in Kanada, or down by the	  Dwellers along the St. Lawrence, or north in Kanada, or down by the
      Yellowstone, dwellers on coasts and off coasts,	      Yellowstone, dwellers on coasts and off coasts,	      Yellowstone, dwellers on coasts and off coasts,	      Yellowstone, dwellers on coasts and off coasts,
  Seal-fishers, whalers, arctic seamen breaking passages through the ice.	  Seal-fishers, whalers, arctic seamen breaking passages through the ice.	  Seal-fishers, whalers, arctic seamen breaking passages through the ice.	  Seal-fishers, whalers, arctic seamen breaking passages through the ice.
			
  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!
  Shapes of factories, arsenals, foundries, markets,	  Shapes of factories, arsenals, foundries, markets,	  Shapes of factories, arsenals, foundries, markets,	  Shapes of factories, arsenals, foundries, markets,
  Shapes of the two-threaded tracks of railroads,	  Shapes of the two-threaded tracks of railroads,	  Shapes of the two-threaded tracks of railroads,	  Shapes of the two-threaded tracks of railroads,
  Shapes of the sleepers of bridges, vast frameworks, girders, arches,	  Shapes of the sleepers of bridges, vast frameworks, girders, arches,	  Shapes of the sleepers of bridges, vast frameworks, girders, arches,	  Shapes of the sleepers of bridges, vast frameworks, girders, arches,
  Shapes of the fleets of barges, tows, lake and canal craft, river craft,	  Shapes of the fleets of barges, tows, lake and canal craft, river craft,	  Shapes of the fleets of barges, tows, lake and canal craft, river craft,	  Shapes of the fleets of barges, tows, lake and canal craft, river craft,
  Ship-yards and dry-docks along the Eastern and Western seas, and in	  Ship-yards and dry-docks along the Eastern and Western seas, and in	  Ship-yards and dry-docks along the Eastern and Western seas, and in	  Ship-yards and dry-docks along the Eastern and Western seas, and in
      many a bay and by-place,	      many a bay and by-place,	      many a bay and by-place,	      many a bay and by-place,
  The live-oak kelsons, the pine planks, the spars, the	  The live-oak kelsons, the pine planks, the spars, the	  The live-oak kelsons, the pine planks, the spars, the	  The live-oak kelsons, the pine planks, the spars, the
      hackmatack-roots for knees,	      hackmatack-roots for knees,	      hackmatack-roots for knees,	      hackmatack-roots for knees,
  The ships themselves on their ways, the tiers of scaffolds, the	  The ships themselves on their ways, the tiers of scaffolds, the	  The ships themselves on their ways, the tiers of scaffolds, the	  The ships themselves on their ways, the tiers of scaffolds, the
      workmen busy outside and inside,	      workmen busy outside and inside,	      workmen busy outside and inside,	      workmen busy outside and inside,
  The tools lying around, the great auger and little auger, the adze,	  The tools lying around, the great auger and little auger, the adze,	  The tools lying around, the great auger and little auger, the adze,	  The tools lying around, the great auger and little auger, the adze,
      bolt, line, square, gouge, and bead-plane.	      bolt, line, square, gouge, and bead-plane.	      bolt, line, square, gouge, and bead-plane.	      bolt, line, square, gouge, and bead-plane.
			
       10	       10	       10	       10
  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!
  The shape measur'd, saw'd, jack'd, join'd, stain'd,	  The shape measur'd, saw'd, jack'd, join'd, stain'd,	  The shape measur'd, saw'd, jack'd, join'd, stain'd,	  The shape measur'd, saw'd, jack'd, join'd, stain'd,
  The coffin-shape for the dead to lie within in his shroud,	  The coffin-shape for the dead to lie within in his shroud,	  The coffin-shape for the dead to lie within in his shroud,	  The coffin-shape for the dead to lie within in his shroud,
  The shape got out in posts, in the bedstead posts, in the posts of	  The shape got out in posts, in the bedstead posts, in the posts of	  The shape got out in posts, in the bedstead posts, in the posts of	  The shape got out in posts, in the bedstead posts, in the posts of
      the bride's bed,	      the bride's bed,	      the bride's bed,	      the bride's bed,
  The shape of the little trough, the shape of the rockers beneath,	  The shape of the little trough, the shape of the rockers beneath,	  The shape of the little trough, the shape of the rockers beneath,	  The shape of the little trough, the shape of the rockers beneath,
      the shape of the babe's cradle,	      the shape of the babe's cradle,	      the shape of the babe's cradle,	      the shape of the babe's cradle,
  The shape of the floor-planks, the floor-planks for dancers' feet,	  The shape of the floor-planks, the floor-planks for dancers' feet,	  The shape of the floor-planks, the floor-planks for dancers' feet,	  The shape of the floor-planks, the floor-planks for dancers' feet,
  The shape of the planks of the family home, the home of the friendly	  The shape of the planks of the family home, the home of the friendly	  The shape of the planks of the family home, the home of the friendly	  The shape of the planks of the family home, the home of the friendly
      parents and children,	      parents and children,	      parents and children,	      parents and children,
  The shape of the roof of the home of the happy young man and	  The shape of the roof of the home of the happy young man and	  The shape of the roof of the home of the happy young man and	  The shape of the roof of the home of the happy young man and
      woman, the roof over the well-married young man and woman,	      woman, the roof over the well-married young man and woman,	      woman, the roof over the well-married young man and woman,	      woman, the roof over the well-married young man and woman,
  The roof over the supper joyously cook'd by the chaste wife, and joyously	  The roof over the supper joyously cook'd by the chaste wife, and joyously	  The roof over the supper joyously cook'd by the chaste wife, and joyously	  The roof over the supper joyously cook'd by the chaste wife, and joyously
      eaten by the chaste husband, content after his day's work.	      eaten by the chaste husband, content after his day's work.	      eaten by the chaste husband, content after his day's work.	      eaten by the chaste husband, content after his day's work.
			
  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!
  The shape of the prisoner's place in the court-room, and of him or	  The shape of the prisoner's place in the court-room, and of him or	  The shape of the prisoner's place in the court-room, and of him or	  The shape of the prisoner's place in the court-room, and of him or
      her seated in the place,	      her seated in the place,	      her seated in the place,	      her seated in the place,
  The shape of the liquor-bar lean'd against by the young rum-drinker	  The shape of the liquor-bar lean'd against by the young rum-drinker	  The shape of the liquor-bar lean'd against by the young rum-drinker	  The shape of the liquor-bar lean'd against by the young rum-drinker
      and the old rum-drinker,	      and the old rum-drinker,	      and the old rum-drinker,	      and the old rum-drinker,
  The shape of the shamed and angry stairs trod by sneaking foot- steps,	  The shape of the shamed and angry stairs trod by sneaking foot- steps,	  The shape of the shamed and angry stairs trod by sneaking foot- steps,	  The shape of the shamed and angry stairs trod by sneaking foot- steps,
  The shape of the sly settee, and the adulterous unwholesome couple,	  The shape of the sly settee, and the adulterous unwholesome couple,	  The shape of the sly settee, and the adulterous unwholesome couple,	  The shape of the sly settee, and the adulterous unwholesome couple,
  The shape of the gambling-board with its devilish winnings and losings,	  The shape of the gambling-board with its devilish winnings and losings,	  The shape of the gambling-board with its devilish winnings and losings,	  The shape of the gambling-board with its devilish winnings and losings,
  The shape of the step-ladder for the convicted and sentenced	  The shape of the step-ladder for the convicted and sentenced	  The shape of the step-ladder for the convicted and sentenced	  The shape of the step-ladder for the convicted and sentenced
      murderer, the murderer with haggard face and pinion'd arms,	      murderer, the murderer with haggard face and pinion'd arms,	      murderer, the murderer with haggard face and pinion'd arms,	      murderer, the murderer with haggard face and pinion'd arms,
  The sheriff at hand with his deputies, the silent and white-lipp'd	  The sheriff at hand with his deputies, the silent and white-lipp'd	  The sheriff at hand with his deputies, the silent and white-lipp'd	  The sheriff at hand with his deputies, the silent and white-lipp'd
      crowd, the dangling of the rope.	      crowd, the dangling of the rope.	      crowd, the dangling of the rope.	      crowd, the dangling of the rope.
			
  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!	  The shapes arise!
  Shapes of doors giving many exits and entrances,	  Shapes of doors giving many exits and entrances,	  Shapes of doors giving many exits and entrances,	  Shapes of doors giving many exits and entrances,
  The door passing the dissever'd friend flush'd and in haste,	  The door passing the dissever'd friend flush'd and in haste,	  The door passing the dissever'd friend flush'd and in haste,	  The door passing the dissever'd friend flush'd and in haste,
  The door that admits good news and bad news,	  The door that admits good news and bad news,	  The door that admits good news and bad news,	  The door that admits good news and bad news,
  The door whence the son left home confident and puff'd up,	  The door whence the son left home confident and puff'd up,	  The door whence the son left home confident and puff'd up,	  The door whence the son left home confident and puff'd up,
  The door he enter'd again from a long and scandalous absence,	  The door he enter'd again from a long and scandalous absence,	  The door he enter'd again from a long and scandalous absence,	  The door he enter'd again from a long and scandalous absence,
      diseas'd, broken down, without innocence, without means.	      diseas'd, broken down, without innocence, without means.	      diseas'd, broken down, without innocence, without means.	      diseas'd, broken down, without innocence, without means.
			
       11	       11	       11	       11
  Her shape arises,	  Her shape arises,	  Her shape arises,	  Her shape arises,
  She less guarded than ever, yet more guarded than ever,	  She less guarded than ever, yet more guarded than ever,	  She less guarded than ever, yet more guarded than ever,	  She less guarded than ever, yet more guarded than ever,
  The gross and soil'd she moves among do not make her gross and soil'd,	  The gross and soil'd she moves among do not make her gross and soil'd,	  The gross and soil'd she moves among do not make her gross and soil'd,	  The gross and soil'd she moves among do not make her gross and soil'd,
  She knows the thoughts as she passes, nothing is conceal'd from her,	  She knows the thoughts as she passes, nothing is conceal'd from her,	  She knows the thoughts as she passes, nothing is conceal'd from her,	  She knows the thoughts as she passes, nothing is conceal'd from her,
  She is none the less considerate or friendly therefor,	  She is none the less considerate or friendly therefor,	  She is none the less considerate or friendly therefor,	  She is none the less considerate or friendly therefor,
  She is the best belov'd, it is without exception, she has no reason	  She is the best belov'd, it is without exception, she has no reason	  She is the best belov'd, it is without exception, she has no reason	  She is the best belov'd, it is without exception, she has no reason
      to fear and she does not fear,	      to fear and she does not fear,	      to fear and she does not fear,	      to fear and she does not fear,
  Oaths, quarrels, hiccupp'd songs, smutty expressions, are idle to	  Oaths, quarrels, hiccupp'd songs, smutty expressions, are idle to	  Oaths, quarrels, hiccupp'd songs, smutty expressions, are idle to	  Oaths, quarrels, hiccupp'd songs, smutty expressions, are idle to
      her as she passes,	      her as she passes,	      her as she passes,	      her as she passes,
  She is silent, she is possess'd of herself, they do not offend her,	  She is silent, she is possess'd of herself, they do not offend her,	  She is silent, she is possess'd of herself, they do not offend her,	  She is silent, she is possess'd of herself, they do not offend her,
  She receives them as the laws of Nature receive them, she is strong,	  She receives them as the laws of Nature receive them, she is strong,	  She receives them as the laws of Nature receive them, she is strong,	  She receives them as the laws of Nature receive them, she is strong,
  She too is a law of Nature--there is no law stronger than she is.	  She too is a law of Nature--there is no law stronger than she is.	  She too is a law of Nature--there is no law stronger than she is.	  She too is a law of Nature--there is no law stronger than she is.
			
       12	       12	       12	       12
  The main shapes arise!	  The main shapes arise!	  The main shapes arise!	  The main shapes arise!
  Shapes of Democracy total, result of centuries,	  Shapes of Democracy total, result of centuries,	  Shapes of Democracy total, result of centuries,	  Shapes of Democracy total, result of centuries,
  Shapes ever projecting other shapes,	  Shapes ever projecting other shapes,	  Shapes ever projecting other shapes,	  Shapes ever projecting other shapes,
  Shapes of turbulent manly cities,	  Shapes of turbulent manly cities,	  Shapes of turbulent manly cities,	  Shapes of turbulent manly cities,
  Shapes of the friends and home-givers of the whole earth,	  Shapes of the friends and home-givers of the whole earth,	  Shapes of the friends and home-givers of the whole earth,	  Shapes of the friends and home-givers of the whole earth,
  Shapes bracing the earth and braced with the whole earth.	  Shapes bracing the earth and braced with the whole earth.	  Shapes bracing the earth and braced with the whole earth.	  Shapes bracing the earth and braced with the whole earth.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XIII	BOOK XIII	BOOK XIII	BOOK XIII
			
			
Song of the Exposition	Song of the Exposition	Song of the Exposition	Song of the Exposition
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  (Ah little recks the laborer,	  (Ah little recks the laborer,	  (Ah little recks the laborer,	  (Ah little recks the laborer,
  How near his work is holding him to God,	  How near his work is holding him to God,	  How near his work is holding him to God,	  How near his work is holding him to God,
  The loving Laborer through space and time.)	  The loving Laborer through space and time.)	  The loving Laborer through space and time.)	  The loving Laborer through space and time.)
			
  After all not to create only, or found only,	  After all not to create only, or found only,	  After all not to create only, or found only,	  After all not to create only, or found only,
  But to bring perhaps from afar what is already founded,	  But to bring perhaps from afar what is already founded,	  But to bring perhaps from afar what is already founded,	  But to bring perhaps from afar what is already founded,
  To give it our own identity, average, limitless, free,	  To give it our own identity, average, limitless, free,	  To give it our own identity, average, limitless, free,	  To give it our own identity, average, limitless, free,
  To fill the gross the torpid bulk with vital religious fire,	  To fill the gross the torpid bulk with vital religious fire,	  To fill the gross the torpid bulk with vital religious fire,	  To fill the gross the torpid bulk with vital religious fire,
  Not to repel or destroy so much as accept, fuse, rehabilitate,	  Not to repel or destroy so much as accept, fuse, rehabilitate,	  Not to repel or destroy so much as accept, fuse, rehabilitate,	  Not to repel or destroy so much as accept, fuse, rehabilitate,
  To obey as well as command, to follow more than to lead,	  To obey as well as command, to follow more than to lead,	  To obey as well as command, to follow more than to lead,	  To obey as well as command, to follow more than to lead,
  These also are the lessons of our New World;	  These also are the lessons of our New World;	  These also are the lessons of our New World;	  These also are the lessons of our New World;
  While how little the New after all, how much the Old, Old World!	  While how little the New after all, how much the Old, Old World!	  While how little the New after all, how much the Old, Old World!	  While how little the New after all, how much the Old, Old World!
			
  Long and long has the grass been growing,	  Long and long has the grass been growing,	  Long and long has the grass been growing,	  Long and long has the grass been growing,
  Long and long has the rain been falling,	  Long and long has the rain been falling,	  Long and long has the rain been falling,	  Long and long has the rain been falling,
  Long has the globe been rolling round.	  Long has the globe been rolling round.	  Long has the globe been rolling round.	  Long has the globe been rolling round.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Come Muse migrate from Greece and Ionia,	  Come Muse migrate from Greece and Ionia,	  Come Muse migrate from Greece and Ionia,	  Come Muse migrate from Greece and Ionia,
  Cross out please those immensely overpaid accounts,	  Cross out please those immensely overpaid accounts,	  Cross out please those immensely overpaid accounts,	  Cross out please those immensely overpaid accounts,
  That matter of Troy and Achilles' wrath, and AEneas', Odysseus' wanderings,	  That matter of Troy and Achilles' wrath, and AEneas', Odysseus' wanderings,	  That matter of Troy and Achilles' wrath, and AEneas', Odysseus' wanderings,	  That matter of Troy and Achilles' wrath, and AEneas', Odysseus' wanderings,
  Placard "Removed" and "To Let" on the rocks of your snowy Parnassus,	  Placard "Removed" and "To Let" on the rocks of your snowy Parnassus,	  Placard "Removed" and "To Let" on the rocks of your snowy Parnassus,	  Placard "Removed" and "To Let" on the rocks of your snowy Parnassus,
  Repeat at Jerusalem, place the notice high on jaffa's gate and on	  Repeat at Jerusalem, place the notice high on jaffa's gate and on	  Repeat at Jerusalem, place the notice high on jaffa's gate and on	  Repeat at Jerusalem, place the notice high on jaffa's gate and on
      Mount Moriah,	      Mount Moriah,	      Mount Moriah,	      Mount Moriah,
  The same on the walls of your German, French and Spanish castles,	  The same on the walls of your German, French and Spanish castles,	  The same on the walls of your German, French and Spanish castles,	  The same on the walls of your German, French and Spanish castles,
      and Italian collections,	      and Italian collections,	      and Italian collections,	      and Italian collections,
  For know a better, fresher, busier sphere, a wide, untried domain	  For know a better, fresher, busier sphere, a wide, untried domain	  For know a better, fresher, busier sphere, a wide, untried domain	  For know a better, fresher, busier sphere, a wide, untried domain
      awaits, demands you.	      awaits, demands you.	      awaits, demands you.	      awaits, demands you.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Responsive to our summons,	  Responsive to our summons,	  Responsive to our summons,	  Responsive to our summons,
  Or rather to her long-nurs'd inclination,	  Or rather to her long-nurs'd inclination,	  Or rather to her long-nurs'd inclination,	  Or rather to her long-nurs'd inclination,
  Join'd with an irresistible, natural gravitation,	  Join'd with an irresistible, natural gravitation,	  Join'd with an irresistible, natural gravitation,	  Join'd with an irresistible, natural gravitation,
  She comes! I hear the rustling of her gown,	  She comes! I hear the rustling of her gown,	  She comes! I hear the rustling of her gown,	  She comes! I hear the rustling of her gown,
  I scent the odor of her breath's delicious fragrance,	  I scent the odor of her breath's delicious fragrance,	  I scent the odor of her breath's delicious fragrance,	  I scent the odor of her breath's delicious fragrance,
  I mark her step divine, her curious eyes a-turning, rolling,	  I mark her step divine, her curious eyes a-turning, rolling,	  I mark her step divine, her curious eyes a-turning, rolling,	  I mark her step divine, her curious eyes a-turning, rolling,
  Upon this very scene.	  Upon this very scene.	  Upon this very scene.	  Upon this very scene.
			
  The dame of dames! can I believe then,	  The dame of dames! can I believe then,	  The dame of dames! can I believe then,	  The dame of dames! can I believe then,
  Those ancient temples, sculptures classic, could none of them retain her?	  Those ancient temples, sculptures classic, could none of them retain her?	  Those ancient temples, sculptures classic, could none of them retain her?	  Those ancient temples, sculptures classic, could none of them retain her?
  Nor shades of Virgil and Dante, nor myriad memories, poems, old	  Nor shades of Virgil and Dante, nor myriad memories, poems, old	  Nor shades of Virgil and Dante, nor myriad memories, poems, old	  Nor shades of Virgil and Dante, nor myriad memories, poems, old
      associations, magnetize and hold on to her?	      associations, magnetize and hold on to her?	      associations, magnetize and hold on to her?	      associations, magnetize and hold on to her?
  But that she's left them all--and here?	  But that she's left them all--and here?	  But that she's left them all--and here?	  But that she's left them all--and here?
			
  Yes, if you will allow me to say so,	  Yes, if you will allow me to say so,	  Yes, if you will allow me to say so,	  Yes, if you will allow me to say so,
  I, my friends, if you do not, can plainly see her,	  I, my friends, if you do not, can plainly see her,	  I, my friends, if you do not, can plainly see her,	  I, my friends, if you do not, can plainly see her,
  The same undying soul of earth's, activity's, beauty's, heroism's	  The same undying soul of earth's, activity's, beauty's, heroism's	  The same undying soul of earth's, activity's, beauty's, heroism's	  The same undying soul of earth's, activity's, beauty's, heroism's
      expression,	      expression,	      expression,	      expression,
  Out from her evolutions hither come, ended the strata of her former themes,	  Out from her evolutions hither come, ended the strata of her former themes,	  Out from her evolutions hither come, ended the strata of her former themes,	  Out from her evolutions hither come, ended the strata of her former themes,
  Hidden and cover'd by to-day's, foundation of to-day's,	  Hidden and cover'd by to-day's, foundation of to-day's,	  Hidden and cover'd by to-day's, foundation of to-day's,	  Hidden and cover'd by to-day's, foundation of to-day's,
  Ended, deceas'd through time, her voice by Castaly's fountain,	  Ended, deceas'd through time, her voice by Castaly's fountain,	  Ended, deceas'd through time, her voice by Castaly's fountain,	  Ended, deceas'd through time, her voice by Castaly's fountain,
  Silent the broken-lipp'd Sphynx in Egypt, silent all those century-	  Silent the broken-lipp'd Sphynx in Egypt, silent all those century-	  Silent the broken-lipp'd Sphynx in Egypt, silent all those century-	  Silent the broken-lipp'd Sphynx in Egypt, silent all those century-
      baffling tombs,	      baffling tombs,	      baffling tombs,	      baffling tombs,
  Ended for aye the epics of Asia's, Europe's helmeted warriors, ended	  Ended for aye the epics of Asia's, Europe's helmeted warriors, ended	  Ended for aye the epics of Asia's, Europe's helmeted warriors, ended	  Ended for aye the epics of Asia's, Europe's helmeted warriors, ended
      the primitive call of the muses,	      the primitive call of the muses,	      the primitive call of the muses,	      the primitive call of the muses,
  Calliope's call forever closed, Clio, Melpomene, Thalia dead,	  Calliope's call forever closed, Clio, Melpomene, Thalia dead,	  Calliope's call forever closed, Clio, Melpomene, Thalia dead,	  Calliope's call forever closed, Clio, Melpomene, Thalia dead,
  Ended the stately rhythmus of Una and Oriana, ended the quest of the	  Ended the stately rhythmus of Una and Oriana, ended the quest of the	  Ended the stately rhythmus of Una and Oriana, ended the quest of the	  Ended the stately rhythmus of Una and Oriana, ended the quest of the
      holy Graal,	      holy Graal,	      holy Graal,	      holy Graal,
  Jerusalem a handful of ashes blown by the wind, extinct,	  Jerusalem a handful of ashes blown by the wind, extinct,	  Jerusalem a handful of ashes blown by the wind, extinct,	  Jerusalem a handful of ashes blown by the wind, extinct,
  The Crusaders' streams of shadowy midnight troops sped with the sunrise,	  The Crusaders' streams of shadowy midnight troops sped with the sunrise,	  The Crusaders' streams of shadowy midnight troops sped with the sunrise,	  The Crusaders' streams of shadowy midnight troops sped with the sunrise,
  Amadis, Tancred, utterly gone, Charlemagne, Roland, Oliver gone,	  Amadis, Tancred, utterly gone, Charlemagne, Roland, Oliver gone,	  Amadis, Tancred, utterly gone, Charlemagne, Roland, Oliver gone,	  Amadis, Tancred, utterly gone, Charlemagne, Roland, Oliver gone,
  Palmerin, ogre, departed, vanish'd the turrets that Usk from its	  Palmerin, ogre, departed, vanish'd the turrets that Usk from its	  Palmerin, ogre, departed, vanish'd the turrets that Usk from its	  Palmerin, ogre, departed, vanish'd the turrets that Usk from its
      waters reflected,	      waters reflected,	      waters reflected,	      waters reflected,
  Arthur vanish'd with all his knights, Merlin and Lancelot and	  Arthur vanish'd with all his knights, Merlin and Lancelot and	  Arthur vanish'd with all his knights, Merlin and Lancelot and	  Arthur vanish'd with all his knights, Merlin and Lancelot and
      Galahad, all gone, dissolv'd utterly like an exhalation;	      Galahad, all gone, dissolv'd utterly like an exhalation;	      Galahad, all gone, dissolv'd utterly like an exhalation;	      Galahad, all gone, dissolv'd utterly like an exhalation;
  Pass'd! pass'd! for us, forever pass'd, that once so mighty world,	  Pass'd! pass'd! for us, forever pass'd, that once so mighty world,	  Pass'd! pass'd! for us, forever pass'd, that once so mighty world,	  Pass'd! pass'd! for us, forever pass'd, that once so mighty world,
      now void, inanimate, phantom world,	      now void, inanimate, phantom world,	      now void, inanimate, phantom world,	      now void, inanimate, phantom world,
  Embroider'd, dazzling, foreign world, with all its gorgeous legends, myths,	  Embroider'd, dazzling, foreign world, with all its gorgeous legends, myths,	  Embroider'd, dazzling, foreign world, with all its gorgeous legends, myths,	  Embroider'd, dazzling, foreign world, with all its gorgeous legends, myths,
  Its kings and castles proud, its priests and warlike lords and	  Its kings and castles proud, its priests and warlike lords and	  Its kings and castles proud, its priests and warlike lords and	  Its kings and castles proud, its priests and warlike lords and
      courtly dames,	      courtly dames,	      courtly dames,	      courtly dames,
  Pass'd to its charnel vault, coffin'd with crown and armor on,	  Pass'd to its charnel vault, coffin'd with crown and armor on,	  Pass'd to its charnel vault, coffin'd with crown and armor on,	  Pass'd to its charnel vault, coffin'd with crown and armor on,
  Blazon'd with Shakspere's purple page,	  Blazon'd with Shakspere's purple page,	  Blazon'd with Shakspere's purple page,	  Blazon'd with Shakspere's purple page,
  And dirged by Tennyson's sweet sad rhyme.	  And dirged by Tennyson's sweet sad rhyme.	  And dirged by Tennyson's sweet sad rhyme.	  And dirged by Tennyson's sweet sad rhyme.
			
  I say I see, my friends, if you do not, the illustrious emigre, (having it	  I say I see, my friends, if you do not, the illustrious emigre, (having it	  I say I see, my friends, if you do not, the illustrious emigre, (having it	  I say I see, my friends, if you do not, the illustrious emigre, (having it
      is true in her day, although the same, changed, journey'd considerable,)	      is true in her day, although the same, changed, journey'd considerable,)	      is true in her day, although the same, changed, journey'd considerable,)	      is true in her day, although the same, changed, journey'd considerable,)
  Making directly for this rendezvous, vigorously clearing a path for	  Making directly for this rendezvous, vigorously clearing a path for	  Making directly for this rendezvous, vigorously clearing a path for	  Making directly for this rendezvous, vigorously clearing a path for
      herself, striding through the confusion,	      herself, striding through the confusion,	      herself, striding through the confusion,	      herself, striding through the confusion,
  By thud of machinery and shrill steam-whistle undismay'd,	  By thud of machinery and shrill steam-whistle undismay'd,	  By thud of machinery and shrill steam-whistle undismay'd,	  By thud of machinery and shrill steam-whistle undismay'd,
  Bluff'd not a bit by drain-pipe, gasometers, artificial fertilizers,	  Bluff'd not a bit by drain-pipe, gasometers, artificial fertilizers,	  Bluff'd not a bit by drain-pipe, gasometers, artificial fertilizers,	  Bluff'd not a bit by drain-pipe, gasometers, artificial fertilizers,
  Smiling and pleas'd with palpable intent to stay,	  Smiling and pleas'd with palpable intent to stay,	  Smiling and pleas'd with palpable intent to stay,	  Smiling and pleas'd with palpable intent to stay,
  She's here, install'd amid the kitchen ware!	  She's here, install'd amid the kitchen ware!	  She's here, install'd amid the kitchen ware!	  She's here, install'd amid the kitchen ware!
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  But hold--don't I forget my manners?	  But hold--don't I forget my manners?	  But hold--don't I forget my manners?	  But hold--don't I forget my manners?
  To introduce the stranger, (what else indeed do I live to chant	  To introduce the stranger, (what else indeed do I live to chant	  To introduce the stranger, (what else indeed do I live to chant	  To introduce the stranger, (what else indeed do I live to chant
      for?) to thee Columbia;	      for?) to thee Columbia;	      for?) to thee Columbia;	      for?) to thee Columbia;
  In liberty's name welcome immortal! clasp hands,	  In liberty's name welcome immortal! clasp hands,	  In liberty's name welcome immortal! clasp hands,	  In liberty's name welcome immortal! clasp hands,
  And ever henceforth sisters dear be both.	  And ever henceforth sisters dear be both.	  And ever henceforth sisters dear be both.	  And ever henceforth sisters dear be both.
			
  Fear not O Muse! truly new ways and days receive, surround you,	  Fear not O Muse! truly new ways and days receive, surround you,	  Fear not O Muse! truly new ways and days receive, surround you,	  Fear not O Muse! truly new ways and days receive, surround you,
  I candidly confess a queer, queer race, of novel fashion,	  I candidly confess a queer, queer race, of novel fashion,	  I candidly confess a queer, queer race, of novel fashion,	  I candidly confess a queer, queer race, of novel fashion,
  And yet the same old human race, the same within, without,	  And yet the same old human race, the same within, without,	  And yet the same old human race, the same within, without,	  And yet the same old human race, the same within, without,
  Faces and hearts the same, feelings the same, yearnings the same,	  Faces and hearts the same, feelings the same, yearnings the same,	  Faces and hearts the same, feelings the same, yearnings the same,	  Faces and hearts the same, feelings the same, yearnings the same,
  The same old love, beauty and use the same.	  The same old love, beauty and use the same.	  The same old love, beauty and use the same.	  The same old love, beauty and use the same.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  We do not blame thee elder World, nor really separate ourselves from thee,	  We do not blame thee elder World, nor really separate ourselves from thee,	  We do not blame thee elder World, nor really separate ourselves from thee,	  We do not blame thee elder World, nor really separate ourselves from thee,
  (Would the son separate himself from the father?)	  (Would the son separate himself from the father?)	  (Would the son separate himself from the father?)	  (Would the son separate himself from the father?)
  Looking back on thee, seeing thee to thy duties, grandeurs, through	  Looking back on thee, seeing thee to thy duties, grandeurs, through	  Looking back on thee, seeing thee to thy duties, grandeurs, through	  Looking back on thee, seeing thee to thy duties, grandeurs, through
      past ages bending, building,	      past ages bending, building,	      past ages bending, building,	      past ages bending, building,
  We build to ours to-day.	  We build to ours to-day.	  We build to ours to-day.	  We build to ours to-day.
			
  Mightier than Egypt's tombs,	  Mightier than Egypt's tombs,	  Mightier than Egypt's tombs,	  Mightier than Egypt's tombs,
  Fairer than Grecia's, Roma's temples,	  Fairer than Grecia's, Roma's temples,	  Fairer than Grecia's, Roma's temples,	  Fairer than Grecia's, Roma's temples,
  Prouder than Milan's statued, spired cathedral,	  Prouder than Milan's statued, spired cathedral,	  Prouder than Milan's statued, spired cathedral,	  Prouder than Milan's statued, spired cathedral,
  More picturesque than Rhenish castle-keeps,	  More picturesque than Rhenish castle-keeps,	  More picturesque than Rhenish castle-keeps,	  More picturesque than Rhenish castle-keeps,
  We plan even now to raise, beyond them all,	  We plan even now to raise, beyond them all,	  We plan even now to raise, beyond them all,	  We plan even now to raise, beyond them all,
  Thy great cathedral sacred industry, no tomb,	  Thy great cathedral sacred industry, no tomb,	  Thy great cathedral sacred industry, no tomb,	  Thy great cathedral sacred industry, no tomb,
  A keep for life for practical invention.	  A keep for life for practical invention.	  A keep for life for practical invention.	  A keep for life for practical invention.
			
  As in a waking vision,	  As in a waking vision,	  As in a waking vision,	  As in a waking vision,
  E'en while I chant I see it rise, I scan and prophesy outside and in,	  E'en while I chant I see it rise, I scan and prophesy outside and in,	  E'en while I chant I see it rise, I scan and prophesy outside and in,	  E'en while I chant I see it rise, I scan and prophesy outside and in,
  Its manifold ensemble.	  Its manifold ensemble.	  Its manifold ensemble.	  Its manifold ensemble.
			
  Around a palace, loftier, fairer, ampler than any yet,	  Around a palace, loftier, fairer, ampler than any yet,	  Around a palace, loftier, fairer, ampler than any yet,	  Around a palace, loftier, fairer, ampler than any yet,
  Earth's modern wonder, history's seven outstripping,	  Earth's modern wonder, history's seven outstripping,	  Earth's modern wonder, history's seven outstripping,	  Earth's modern wonder, history's seven outstripping,
  High rising tier on tier with glass and iron facades,	  High rising tier on tier with glass and iron facades,	  High rising tier on tier with glass and iron facades,	  High rising tier on tier with glass and iron facades,
  Gladdening the sun and sky, enhued in cheerfulest hues,	  Gladdening the sun and sky, enhued in cheerfulest hues,	  Gladdening the sun and sky, enhued in cheerfulest hues,	  Gladdening the sun and sky, enhued in cheerfulest hues,
  Bronze, lilac, robin's-egg, marine and crimson,	  Bronze, lilac, robin's-egg, marine and crimson,	  Bronze, lilac, robin's-egg, marine and crimson,	  Bronze, lilac, robin's-egg, marine and crimson,
  Over whose golden roof shall flaunt, beneath thy banner Freedom,	  Over whose golden roof shall flaunt, beneath thy banner Freedom,	  Over whose golden roof shall flaunt, beneath thy banner Freedom,	  Over whose golden roof shall flaunt, beneath thy banner Freedom,
  The banners of the States and flags of every land,	  The banners of the States and flags of every land,	  The banners of the States and flags of every land,	  The banners of the States and flags of every land,
  A brood of lofty, fair, but lesser palaces shall cluster.	  A brood of lofty, fair, but lesser palaces shall cluster.	  A brood of lofty, fair, but lesser palaces shall cluster.	  A brood of lofty, fair, but lesser palaces shall cluster.
			
  Somewhere within their walls shall all that forwards perfect human	  Somewhere within their walls shall all that forwards perfect human	  Somewhere within their walls shall all that forwards perfect human	  Somewhere within their walls shall all that forwards perfect human
      life be started,	      life be started,	      life be started,	      life be started,
  Tried, taught, advanced, visibly exhibited.	  Tried, taught, advanced, visibly exhibited.	  Tried, taught, advanced, visibly exhibited.	  Tried, taught, advanced, visibly exhibited.
			
  Not only all the world of works, trade, products,	  Not only all the world of works, trade, products,	  Not only all the world of works, trade, products,	  Not only all the world of works, trade, products,
  But all the workmen of the world here to be represented.	  But all the workmen of the world here to be represented.	  But all the workmen of the world here to be represented.	  But all the workmen of the world here to be represented.
			
  Here shall you trace in flowing operation,	  Here shall you trace in flowing operation,	  Here shall you trace in flowing operation,	  Here shall you trace in flowing operation,
  In every state of practical, busy movement, the rills of civilization,	  In every state of practical, busy movement, the rills of civilization,	  In every state of practical, busy movement, the rills of civilization,	  In every state of practical, busy movement, the rills of civilization,
  Materials here under your eye shall change their shape as if by magic,	  Materials here under your eye shall change their shape as if by magic,	  Materials here under your eye shall change their shape as if by magic,	  Materials here under your eye shall change their shape as if by magic,
  The cotton shall be pick'd almost in the very field,	  The cotton shall be pick'd almost in the very field,	  The cotton shall be pick'd almost in the very field,	  The cotton shall be pick'd almost in the very field,
  Shall be dried, clean'd, ginn'd, baled, spun into thread and cloth	  Shall be dried, clean'd, ginn'd, baled, spun into thread and cloth	  Shall be dried, clean'd, ginn'd, baled, spun into thread and cloth	  Shall be dried, clean'd, ginn'd, baled, spun into thread and cloth
      before you,	      before you,	      before you,	      before you,
  You shall see hands at work at all the old processes and all the new ones,	  You shall see hands at work at all the old processes and all the new ones,	  You shall see hands at work at all the old processes and all the new ones,	  You shall see hands at work at all the old processes and all the new ones,
  You shall see the various grains and how flour is made and then	  You shall see the various grains and how flour is made and then	  You shall see the various grains and how flour is made and then	  You shall see the various grains and how flour is made and then
      bread baked by the bakers,	      bread baked by the bakers,	      bread baked by the bakers,	      bread baked by the bakers,
  You shall see the crude ores of California and Nevada passing on and	  You shall see the crude ores of California and Nevada passing on and	  You shall see the crude ores of California and Nevada passing on and	  You shall see the crude ores of California and Nevada passing on and
      on till they become bullion,	      on till they become bullion,	      on till they become bullion,	      on till they become bullion,
  You shall watch how the printer sets type, and learn what a	  You shall watch how the printer sets type, and learn what a	  You shall watch how the printer sets type, and learn what a	  You shall watch how the printer sets type, and learn what a
      composing-stick is,	      composing-stick is,	      composing-stick is,	      composing-stick is,
  You shall mark in amazement the Hoe press whirling its cylinders,	  You shall mark in amazement the Hoe press whirling its cylinders,	  You shall mark in amazement the Hoe press whirling its cylinders,	  You shall mark in amazement the Hoe press whirling its cylinders,
      shedding the printed leaves steady and fast,	      shedding the printed leaves steady and fast,	      shedding the printed leaves steady and fast,	      shedding the printed leaves steady and fast,
  The photograph, model, watch, pin, nail, shall be created before you.	  The photograph, model, watch, pin, nail, shall be created before you.	  The photograph, model, watch, pin, nail, shall be created before you.	  The photograph, model, watch, pin, nail, shall be created before you.
			
  In large calm halls, a stately museum shall teach you the infinite	  In large calm halls, a stately museum shall teach you the infinite	  In large calm halls, a stately museum shall teach you the infinite	  In large calm halls, a stately museum shall teach you the infinite
      lessons of minerals,	      lessons of minerals,	      lessons of minerals,	      lessons of minerals,
  In another, woods, plants, vegetation shall be illustrated--in	  In another, woods, plants, vegetation shall be illustrated--in	  In another, woods, plants, vegetation shall be illustrated--in	  In another, woods, plants, vegetation shall be illustrated--in
      another animals, animal life and development.	      another animals, animal life and development.	      another animals, animal life and development.	      another animals, animal life and development.
			
  One stately house shall be the music house,	  One stately house shall be the music house,	  One stately house shall be the music house,	  One stately house shall be the music house,
  Others for other arts--learning, the sciences, shall all be here,	  Others for other arts--learning, the sciences, shall all be here,	  Others for other arts--learning, the sciences, shall all be here,	  Others for other arts--learning, the sciences, shall all be here,
  None shall be slighted, none but shall here be honor'd, help'd, exampled.	  None shall be slighted, none but shall here be honor'd, help'd, exampled.	  None shall be slighted, none but shall here be honor'd, help'd, exampled.	  None shall be slighted, none but shall here be honor'd, help'd, exampled.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  (This, this and these, America, shall be your pyramids and obelisks,	  (This, this and these, America, shall be your pyramids and obelisks,	  (This, this and these, America, shall be your pyramids and obelisks,	  (This, this and these, America, shall be your pyramids and obelisks,
  Your Alexandrian Pharos, gardens of Babylon,	  Your Alexandrian Pharos, gardens of Babylon,	  Your Alexandrian Pharos, gardens of Babylon,	  Your Alexandrian Pharos, gardens of Babylon,
  Your temple at Olympia.)	  Your temple at Olympia.)	  Your temple at Olympia.)	  Your temple at Olympia.)
			
  The male and female many laboring not,	  The male and female many laboring not,	  The male and female many laboring not,	  The male and female many laboring not,
  Shall ever here confront the laboring many,	  Shall ever here confront the laboring many,	  Shall ever here confront the laboring many,	  Shall ever here confront the laboring many,
  With precious benefits to both, glory to all,	  With precious benefits to both, glory to all,	  With precious benefits to both, glory to all,	  With precious benefits to both, glory to all,
  To thee America, and thee eternal Muse.	  To thee America, and thee eternal Muse.	  To thee America, and thee eternal Muse.	  To thee America, and thee eternal Muse.
			
  And here shall ye inhabit powerful Matrons!	  And here shall ye inhabit powerful Matrons!	  And here shall ye inhabit powerful Matrons!	  And here shall ye inhabit powerful Matrons!
  In your vast state vaster than all the old,	  In your vast state vaster than all the old,	  In your vast state vaster than all the old,	  In your vast state vaster than all the old,
  Echoed through long, long centuries to come,	  Echoed through long, long centuries to come,	  Echoed through long, long centuries to come,	  Echoed through long, long centuries to come,
  To sound of different, prouder songs, with stronger themes,	  To sound of different, prouder songs, with stronger themes,	  To sound of different, prouder songs, with stronger themes,	  To sound of different, prouder songs, with stronger themes,
  Practical, peaceful life, the people's life, the People themselves,	  Practical, peaceful life, the people's life, the People themselves,	  Practical, peaceful life, the people's life, the People themselves,	  Practical, peaceful life, the people's life, the People themselves,
  Lifted, illumin'd, bathed in peace--elate, secure in peace.	  Lifted, illumin'd, bathed in peace--elate, secure in peace.	  Lifted, illumin'd, bathed in peace--elate, secure in peace.	  Lifted, illumin'd, bathed in peace--elate, secure in peace.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  Away with themes of war! away with war itself!	  Away with themes of war! away with war itself!	  Away with themes of war! away with war itself!	  Away with themes of war! away with war itself!
  Hence from my shuddering sight to never more return that show of	  Hence from my shuddering sight to never more return that show of	  Hence from my shuddering sight to never more return that show of	  Hence from my shuddering sight to never more return that show of
      blacken'd, mutilated corpses!	      blacken'd, mutilated corpses!	      blacken'd, mutilated corpses!	      blacken'd, mutilated corpses!
  That hell unpent and raid of blood, fit for wild tigers or for	  That hell unpent and raid of blood, fit for wild tigers or for	  That hell unpent and raid of blood, fit for wild tigers or for	  That hell unpent and raid of blood, fit for wild tigers or for
      lop-tongued wolves, not reasoning men,	      lop-tongued wolves, not reasoning men,	      lop-tongued wolves, not reasoning men,	      lop-tongued wolves, not reasoning men,
  And in its stead speed industry's campaigns,	  And in its stead speed industry's campaigns,	  And in its stead speed industry's campaigns,	  And in its stead speed industry's campaigns,
  With thy undaunted armies, engineering,	  With thy undaunted armies, engineering,	  With thy undaunted armies, engineering,	  With thy undaunted armies, engineering,
  Thy pennants labor, loosen'd to the breeze,	  Thy pennants labor, loosen'd to the breeze,	  Thy pennants labor, loosen'd to the breeze,	  Thy pennants labor, loosen'd to the breeze,
  Thy bugles sounding loud and clear.	  Thy bugles sounding loud and clear.	  Thy bugles sounding loud and clear.	  Thy bugles sounding loud and clear.
			
  Away with old romance!	  Away with old romance!	  Away with old romance!	  Away with old romance!
  Away with novels, plots and plays of foreign courts,	  Away with novels, plots and plays of foreign courts,	  Away with novels, plots and plays of foreign courts,	  Away with novels, plots and plays of foreign courts,
  Away with love-verses sugar'd in rhyme, the intrigues, amours of idlers,	  Away with love-verses sugar'd in rhyme, the intrigues, amours of idlers,	  Away with love-verses sugar'd in rhyme, the intrigues, amours of idlers,	  Away with love-verses sugar'd in rhyme, the intrigues, amours of idlers,
  Fitted for only banquets of the night where dancers to late music slide,	  Fitted for only banquets of the night where dancers to late music slide,	  Fitted for only banquets of the night where dancers to late music slide,	  Fitted for only banquets of the night where dancers to late music slide,
  The unhealthy pleasures, extravagant dissipations of the few,	  The unhealthy pleasures, extravagant dissipations of the few,	  The unhealthy pleasures, extravagant dissipations of the few,	  The unhealthy pleasures, extravagant dissipations of the few,
  With perfumes, heat and wine, beneath the dazzling chandeliers.	  With perfumes, heat and wine, beneath the dazzling chandeliers.	  With perfumes, heat and wine, beneath the dazzling chandeliers.	  With perfumes, heat and wine, beneath the dazzling chandeliers.
			
  To you ye reverent sane sisters,	  To you ye reverent sane sisters,	  To you ye reverent sane sisters,	  To you ye reverent sane sisters,
  I raise a voice for far superber themes for poets and for art,	  I raise a voice for far superber themes for poets and for art,	  I raise a voice for far superber themes for poets and for art,	  I raise a voice for far superber themes for poets and for art,
  To exalt the present and the real,	  To exalt the present and the real,	  To exalt the present and the real,	  To exalt the present and the real,
  To teach the average man the glory of his daily walk and trade,	  To teach the average man the glory of his daily walk and trade,	  To teach the average man the glory of his daily walk and trade,	  To teach the average man the glory of his daily walk and trade,
  To sing in songs how exercise and chemical life are never to be baffled,	  To sing in songs how exercise and chemical life are never to be baffled,	  To sing in songs how exercise and chemical life are never to be baffled,	  To sing in songs how exercise and chemical life are never to be baffled,
  To manual work for each and all, to plough, hoe, dig,	  To manual work for each and all, to plough, hoe, dig,	  To manual work for each and all, to plough, hoe, dig,	  To manual work for each and all, to plough, hoe, dig,
  To plant and tend the tree, the berry, vegetables, flowers,	  To plant and tend the tree, the berry, vegetables, flowers,	  To plant and tend the tree, the berry, vegetables, flowers,	  To plant and tend the tree, the berry, vegetables, flowers,
  For every man to see to it that he really do something, for every woman too;	  For every man to see to it that he really do something, for every woman too;	  For every man to see to it that he really do something, for every woman too;	  For every man to see to it that he really do something, for every woman too;
  To use the hammer and the saw, (rip, or cross-cut,)	  To use the hammer and the saw, (rip, or cross-cut,)	  To use the hammer and the saw, (rip, or cross-cut,)	  To use the hammer and the saw, (rip, or cross-cut,)
  To cultivate a turn for carpentering, plastering, painting,	  To cultivate a turn for carpentering, plastering, painting,	  To cultivate a turn for carpentering, plastering, painting,	  To cultivate a turn for carpentering, plastering, painting,
  To work as tailor, tailoress, nurse, hostler, porter,	  To work as tailor, tailoress, nurse, hostler, porter,	  To work as tailor, tailoress, nurse, hostler, porter,	  To work as tailor, tailoress, nurse, hostler, porter,
  To invent a little, something ingenious, to aid the washing, cooking,	  To invent a little, something ingenious, to aid the washing, cooking,	  To invent a little, something ingenious, to aid the washing, cooking,	  To invent a little, something ingenious, to aid the washing, cooking,
      cleaning,	      cleaning,	      cleaning,	      cleaning,
  And hold it no disgrace to take a hand at them themselves.	  And hold it no disgrace to take a hand at them themselves.	  And hold it no disgrace to take a hand at them themselves.	  And hold it no disgrace to take a hand at them themselves.
			
  I say I bring thee Muse to-day and here,	  I say I bring thee Muse to-day and here,	  I say I bring thee Muse to-day and here,	  I say I bring thee Muse to-day and here,
  All occupations, duties broad and close,	  All occupations, duties broad and close,	  All occupations, duties broad and close,	  All occupations, duties broad and close,
  Toil, healthy toil and sweat, endless, without cessation,	  Toil, healthy toil and sweat, endless, without cessation,	  Toil, healthy toil and sweat, endless, without cessation,	  Toil, healthy toil and sweat, endless, without cessation,
  The old, old practical burdens, interests, joys,	  The old, old practical burdens, interests, joys,	  The old, old practical burdens, interests, joys,	  The old, old practical burdens, interests, joys,
  The family, parentage, childhood, husband and wife,	  The family, parentage, childhood, husband and wife,	  The family, parentage, childhood, husband and wife,	  The family, parentage, childhood, husband and wife,
  The house-comforts, the house itself and all its belongings,	  The house-comforts, the house itself and all its belongings,	  The house-comforts, the house itself and all its belongings,	  The house-comforts, the house itself and all its belongings,
  Food and its preservation, chemistry applied to it,	  Food and its preservation, chemistry applied to it,	  Food and its preservation, chemistry applied to it,	  Food and its preservation, chemistry applied to it,
  Whatever forms the average, strong, complete, sweet-blooded man or	  Whatever forms the average, strong, complete, sweet-blooded man or	  Whatever forms the average, strong, complete, sweet-blooded man or	  Whatever forms the average, strong, complete, sweet-blooded man or
      woman, the perfect longeve personality,	      woman, the perfect longeve personality,	      woman, the perfect longeve personality,	      woman, the perfect longeve personality,
  And helps its present life to health and happiness, and shapes its soul,	  And helps its present life to health and happiness, and shapes its soul,	  And helps its present life to health and happiness, and shapes its soul,	  And helps its present life to health and happiness, and shapes its soul,
  For the eternal real life to come.	  For the eternal real life to come.	  For the eternal real life to come.	  For the eternal real life to come.
			
  With latest connections, works, the inter-transportation of the world,	  With latest connections, works, the inter-transportation of the world,	  With latest connections, works, the inter-transportation of the world,	  With latest connections, works, the inter-transportation of the world,
  Steam-power, the great express lines, gas, petroleum,	  Steam-power, the great express lines, gas, petroleum,	  Steam-power, the great express lines, gas, petroleum,	  Steam-power, the great express lines, gas, petroleum,
  These triumphs of our time, the Atlantic's delicate cable,	  These triumphs of our time, the Atlantic's delicate cable,	  These triumphs of our time, the Atlantic's delicate cable,	  These triumphs of our time, the Atlantic's delicate cable,
  The Pacific railroad, the Suez canal, the Mont Cenis and Gothard and	  The Pacific railroad, the Suez canal, the Mont Cenis and Gothard and	  The Pacific railroad, the Suez canal, the Mont Cenis and Gothard and	  The Pacific railroad, the Suez canal, the Mont Cenis and Gothard and
      Hoosac tunnels, the Brooklyn bridge,	      Hoosac tunnels, the Brooklyn bridge,	      Hoosac tunnels, the Brooklyn bridge,	      Hoosac tunnels, the Brooklyn bridge,
  This earth all spann'd with iron rails, with lines of steamships	  This earth all spann'd with iron rails, with lines of steamships	  This earth all spann'd with iron rails, with lines of steamships	  This earth all spann'd with iron rails, with lines of steamships
      threading in every sea,	      threading in every sea,	      threading in every sea,	      threading in every sea,
  Our own rondure, the current globe I bring.	  Our own rondure, the current globe I bring.	  Our own rondure, the current globe I bring.	  Our own rondure, the current globe I bring.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  And thou America,	  And thou America,	  And thou America,	  And thou America,
  Thy offspring towering e'er so high, yet higher Thee above all towering,	  Thy offspring towering e'er so high, yet higher Thee above all towering,	  Thy offspring towering e'er so high, yet higher Thee above all towering,	  Thy offspring towering e'er so high, yet higher Thee above all towering,
  With Victory on thy left, and at thy right hand Law;	  With Victory on thy left, and at thy right hand Law;	  With Victory on thy left, and at thy right hand Law;	  With Victory on thy left, and at thy right hand Law;
  Thou Union holding all, fusing, absorbing, tolerating all,	  Thou Union holding all, fusing, absorbing, tolerating all,	  Thou Union holding all, fusing, absorbing, tolerating all,	  Thou Union holding all, fusing, absorbing, tolerating all,
  Thee, ever thee, I sing.	  Thee, ever thee, I sing.	  Thee, ever thee, I sing.	  Thee, ever thee, I sing.
			
  Thou, also thou, a World,	  Thou, also thou, a World,	  Thou, also thou, a World,	  Thou, also thou, a World,
  With all thy wide geographies, manifold, different, distant,	  With all thy wide geographies, manifold, different, distant,	  With all thy wide geographies, manifold, different, distant,	  With all thy wide geographies, manifold, different, distant,
  Rounded by thee in one--one common orbic language,	  Rounded by thee in one--one common orbic language,	  Rounded by thee in one--one common orbic language,	  Rounded by thee in one--one common orbic language,
  One common indivisible destiny for All.	  One common indivisible destiny for All.	  One common indivisible destiny for All.	  One common indivisible destiny for All.
			
  And by the spells which ye vouchsafe to those your ministers in earnest,	  And by the spells which ye vouchsafe to those your ministers in earnest,	  And by the spells which ye vouchsafe to those your ministers in earnest,	  And by the spells which ye vouchsafe to those your ministers in earnest,
  I here personify and call my themes, to make them pass before ye.	  I here personify and call my themes, to make them pass before ye.	  I here personify and call my themes, to make them pass before ye.	  I here personify and call my themes, to make them pass before ye.
			
  Behold, America! (and thou, ineffable guest and sister!)	  Behold, America! (and thou, ineffable guest and sister!)	  Behold, America! (and thou, ineffable guest and sister!)	  Behold, America! (and thou, ineffable guest and sister!)
  For thee come trooping up thy waters and thy lands;	  For thee come trooping up thy waters and thy lands;	  For thee come trooping up thy waters and thy lands;	  For thee come trooping up thy waters and thy lands;
  Behold! thy fields and farms, thy far-off woods and mountains,	  Behold! thy fields and farms, thy far-off woods and mountains,	  Behold! thy fields and farms, thy far-off woods and mountains,	  Behold! thy fields and farms, thy far-off woods and mountains,
  As in procession coming.	  As in procession coming.	  As in procession coming.	  As in procession coming.
			
  Behold, the sea itself,	  Behold, the sea itself,	  Behold, the sea itself,	  Behold, the sea itself,
  And on its limitless, heaving breast, the ships;	  And on its limitless, heaving breast, the ships;	  And on its limitless, heaving breast, the ships;	  And on its limitless, heaving breast, the ships;
  See, where their white sails, bellying in the wind, speckle the	  See, where their white sails, bellying in the wind, speckle the	  See, where their white sails, bellying in the wind, speckle the	  See, where their white sails, bellying in the wind, speckle the
      green and blue,	      green and blue,	      green and blue,	      green and blue,
  See, the steamers coming and going, steaming in or out of port,	  See, the steamers coming and going, steaming in or out of port,	  See, the steamers coming and going, steaming in or out of port,	  See, the steamers coming and going, steaming in or out of port,
  See, dusky and undulating, the long pennants of smoke.	  See, dusky and undulating, the long pennants of smoke.	  See, dusky and undulating, the long pennants of smoke.	  See, dusky and undulating, the long pennants of smoke.
			
  Behold, in Oregon, far in the north and west,	  Behold, in Oregon, far in the north and west,	  Behold, in Oregon, far in the north and west,	  Behold, in Oregon, far in the north and west,
  Or in Maine, far in the north and east, thy cheerful axemen,	  Or in Maine, far in the north and east, thy cheerful axemen,	  Or in Maine, far in the north and east, thy cheerful axemen,	  Or in Maine, far in the north and east, thy cheerful axemen,
  Wielding all day their axes.	  Wielding all day their axes.	  Wielding all day their axes.	  Wielding all day their axes.
			
  Behold, on the lakes, thy pilots at their wheels, thy oarsmen,	  Behold, on the lakes, thy pilots at their wheels, thy oarsmen,	  Behold, on the lakes, thy pilots at their wheels, thy oarsmen,	  Behold, on the lakes, thy pilots at their wheels, thy oarsmen,
  How the ash writhes under those muscular arms!	  How the ash writhes under those muscular arms!	  How the ash writhes under those muscular arms!	  How the ash writhes under those muscular arms!
			
  There by the furnace, and there by the anvil,	  There by the furnace, and there by the anvil,	  There by the furnace, and there by the anvil,	  There by the furnace, and there by the anvil,
  Behold thy sturdy blacksmiths swinging their sledges,	  Behold thy sturdy blacksmiths swinging their sledges,	  Behold thy sturdy blacksmiths swinging their sledges,	  Behold thy sturdy blacksmiths swinging their sledges,
  Overhand so steady, overhand they turn and fall with joyous clank,	  Overhand so steady, overhand they turn and fall with joyous clank,	  Overhand so steady, overhand they turn and fall with joyous clank,	  Overhand so steady, overhand they turn and fall with joyous clank,
  Like a tumult of laughter.	  Like a tumult of laughter.	  Like a tumult of laughter.	  Like a tumult of laughter.
			
  Mark the spirit of invention everywhere, thy rapid patents,	  Mark the spirit of invention everywhere, thy rapid patents,	  Mark the spirit of invention everywhere, thy rapid patents,	  Mark the spirit of invention everywhere, thy rapid patents,
  Thy continual workshops, foundries, risen or rising,	  Thy continual workshops, foundries, risen or rising,	  Thy continual workshops, foundries, risen or rising,	  Thy continual workshops, foundries, risen or rising,
  See, from their chimneys how the tall flame-fires stream.	  See, from their chimneys how the tall flame-fires stream.	  See, from their chimneys how the tall flame-fires stream.	  See, from their chimneys how the tall flame-fires stream.
			
  Mark, thy interminable farms, North, South,	  Mark, thy interminable farms, North, South,	  Mark, thy interminable farms, North, South,	  Mark, thy interminable farms, North, South,
  Thy wealthy daughter-states, Eastern and Western,	  Thy wealthy daughter-states, Eastern and Western,	  Thy wealthy daughter-states, Eastern and Western,	  Thy wealthy daughter-states, Eastern and Western,
  The varied products of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Georgia, Texas,	  The varied products of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Georgia, Texas,	  The varied products of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Georgia, Texas,	  The varied products of Ohio, Pennsylvania, Missouri, Georgia, Texas,
      and the rest,	      and the rest,	      and the rest,	      and the rest,
  Thy limitless crops, grass, wheat, sugar, oil, corn, rice, hemp, hops,	  Thy limitless crops, grass, wheat, sugar, oil, corn, rice, hemp, hops,	  Thy limitless crops, grass, wheat, sugar, oil, corn, rice, hemp, hops,	  Thy limitless crops, grass, wheat, sugar, oil, corn, rice, hemp, hops,
  Thy barns all fill'd, the endless freight-train and the bulging store-house,	  Thy barns all fill'd, the endless freight-train and the bulging store-house,	  Thy barns all fill'd, the endless freight-train and the bulging store-house,	  Thy barns all fill'd, the endless freight-train and the bulging store-house,
  The grapes that ripen on thy vines, the apples in thy orchards,	  The grapes that ripen on thy vines, the apples in thy orchards,	  The grapes that ripen on thy vines, the apples in thy orchards,	  The grapes that ripen on thy vines, the apples in thy orchards,
  Thy incalculable lumber, beef, pork, potatoes, thy coal, thy gold	  Thy incalculable lumber, beef, pork, potatoes, thy coal, thy gold	  Thy incalculable lumber, beef, pork, potatoes, thy coal, thy gold	  Thy incalculable lumber, beef, pork, potatoes, thy coal, thy gold
      and silver,	      and silver,	      and silver,	      and silver,
  The inexhaustible iron in thy mines.	  The inexhaustible iron in thy mines.	  The inexhaustible iron in thy mines.	  The inexhaustible iron in thy mines.
			
  All thine O sacred Union!	  All thine O sacred Union!	  All thine O sacred Union!	  All thine O sacred Union!
  Ships, farms, shops, barns, factories, mines,	  Ships, farms, shops, barns, factories, mines,	  Ships, farms, shops, barns, factories, mines,	  Ships, farms, shops, barns, factories, mines,
  City and State, North, South, item and aggregate,	  City and State, North, South, item and aggregate,	  City and State, North, South, item and aggregate,	  City and State, North, South, item and aggregate,
  We dedicate, dread Mother, all to thee!	  We dedicate, dread Mother, all to thee!	  We dedicate, dread Mother, all to thee!	  We dedicate, dread Mother, all to thee!
			
  Protectress absolute, thou! bulwark of all!	  Protectress absolute, thou! bulwark of all!	  Protectress absolute, thou! bulwark of all!	  Protectress absolute, thou! bulwark of all!
  For well we know that while thou givest each and all, (generous as God,)	  For well we know that while thou givest each and all, (generous as God,)	  For well we know that while thou givest each and all, (generous as God,)	  For well we know that while thou givest each and all, (generous as God,)
  Without thee neither all nor each, nor land, home,	  Without thee neither all nor each, nor land, home,	  Without thee neither all nor each, nor land, home,	  Without thee neither all nor each, nor land, home,
  Nor ship, nor mine, nor any here this day secure,	  Nor ship, nor mine, nor any here this day secure,	  Nor ship, nor mine, nor any here this day secure,	  Nor ship, nor mine, nor any here this day secure,
  Nor aught, nor any day secure.	  Nor aught, nor any day secure.	  Nor aught, nor any day secure.	  Nor aught, nor any day secure.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  And thou, the Emblem waving over all!	  And thou, the Emblem waving over all!	  And thou, the Emblem waving over all!	  And thou, the Emblem waving over all!
  Delicate beauty, a word to thee, (it may be salutary,)	  Delicate beauty, a word to thee, (it may be salutary,)	  Delicate beauty, a word to thee, (it may be salutary,)	  Delicate beauty, a word to thee, (it may be salutary,)
  Remember thou hast not always been as here to-day so comfortably	  Remember thou hast not always been as here to-day so comfortably	  Remember thou hast not always been as here to-day so comfortably	  Remember thou hast not always been as here to-day so comfortably
      ensovereign'd,	      ensovereign'd,	      ensovereign'd,	      ensovereign'd,
  In other scenes than these have I observ'd thee flag,	  In other scenes than these have I observ'd thee flag,	  In other scenes than these have I observ'd thee flag,	  In other scenes than these have I observ'd thee flag,
  Not quite so trim and whole and freshly blooming in folds of	  Not quite so trim and whole and freshly blooming in folds of	  Not quite so trim and whole and freshly blooming in folds of	  Not quite so trim and whole and freshly blooming in folds of
      stainless silk,	      stainless silk,	      stainless silk,	      stainless silk,
  But I have seen thee bunting, to tatters torn upon thy splinter'd staff,	  But I have seen thee bunting, to tatters torn upon thy splinter'd staff,	  But I have seen thee bunting, to tatters torn upon thy splinter'd staff,	  But I have seen thee bunting, to tatters torn upon thy splinter'd staff,
  Or clutch'd to some young color-bearer's breast with desperate hands,	  Or clutch'd to some young color-bearer's breast with desperate hands,	  Or clutch'd to some young color-bearer's breast with desperate hands,	  Or clutch'd to some young color-bearer's breast with desperate hands,
  Savagely struggled for, for life or death, fought over long,	  Savagely struggled for, for life or death, fought over long,	  Savagely struggled for, for life or death, fought over long,	  Savagely struggled for, for life or death, fought over long,
  'Mid cannons' thunder-crash and many a curse and groan and yell, and	  'Mid cannons' thunder-crash and many a curse and groan and yell, and	  'Mid cannons' thunder-crash and many a curse and groan and yell, and	  'Mid cannons' thunder-crash and many a curse and groan and yell, and
      rifle-volleys cracking sharp,	      rifle-volleys cracking sharp,	      rifle-volleys cracking sharp,	      rifle-volleys cracking sharp,
  And moving masses as wild demons surging, and lives as nothing risk'd,	  And moving masses as wild demons surging, and lives as nothing risk'd,	  And moving masses as wild demons surging, and lives as nothing risk'd,	  And moving masses as wild demons surging, and lives as nothing risk'd,
  For thy mere remnant grimed with dirt and smoke and sopp'd in blood,	  For thy mere remnant grimed with dirt and smoke and sopp'd in blood,	  For thy mere remnant grimed with dirt and smoke and sopp'd in blood,	  For thy mere remnant grimed with dirt and smoke and sopp'd in blood,
  For sake of that, my beauty, and that thou might'st dally as now	  For sake of that, my beauty, and that thou might'st dally as now	  For sake of that, my beauty, and that thou might'st dally as now	  For sake of that, my beauty, and that thou might'st dally as now
      secure up there,	      secure up there,	      secure up there,	      secure up there,
  Many a good man have I seen go under.	  Many a good man have I seen go under.	  Many a good man have I seen go under.	  Many a good man have I seen go under.
			
  Now here and these and hence in peace, all thine O Flag!	  Now here and these and hence in peace, all thine O Flag!	  Now here and these and hence in peace, all thine O Flag!	  Now here and these and hence in peace, all thine O Flag!
  And here and hence for thee, O universal Muse! and thou for them!	  And here and hence for thee, O universal Muse! and thou for them!	  And here and hence for thee, O universal Muse! and thou for them!	  And here and hence for thee, O universal Muse! and thou for them!
  And here and hence O Union, all the work and workmen thine!	  And here and hence O Union, all the work and workmen thine!	  And here and hence O Union, all the work and workmen thine!	  And here and hence O Union, all the work and workmen thine!
  None separate from thee--henceforth One only, we and thou,	  None separate from thee--henceforth One only, we and thou,	  None separate from thee--henceforth One only, we and thou,	  None separate from thee--henceforth One only, we and thou,
  (For the blood of the children, what is it, only the blood maternal?	  (For the blood of the children, what is it, only the blood maternal?	  (For the blood of the children, what is it, only the blood maternal?	  (For the blood of the children, what is it, only the blood maternal?
  And lives and works, what are they all at last, except the roads to	  And lives and works, what are they all at last, except the roads to	  And lives and works, what are they all at last, except the roads to	  And lives and works, what are they all at last, except the roads to
      faith and death?)	      faith and death?)	      faith and death?)	      faith and death?)
			
  While we rehearse our measureless wealth, it is for thee, dear Mother,	  While we rehearse our measureless wealth, it is for thee, dear Mother,	  While we rehearse our measureless wealth, it is for thee, dear Mother,	  While we rehearse our measureless wealth, it is for thee, dear Mother,
  We own it all and several to-day indissoluble in thee;	  We own it all and several to-day indissoluble in thee;	  We own it all and several to-day indissoluble in thee;	  We own it all and several to-day indissoluble in thee;
  Think not our chant, our show, merely for products gross or lucre--	  Think not our chant, our show, merely for products gross or lucre--	  Think not our chant, our show, merely for products gross or lucre--	  Think not our chant, our show, merely for products gross or lucre--
      it is for thee, the soul in thee, electric, spiritual!	      it is for thee, the soul in thee, electric, spiritual!	      it is for thee, the soul in thee, electric, spiritual!	      it is for thee, the soul in thee, electric, spiritual!
  Our farms, inventions, crops, we own in thee! cities and States in thee!	  Our farms, inventions, crops, we own in thee! cities and States in thee!	  Our farms, inventions, crops, we own in thee! cities and States in thee!	  Our farms, inventions, crops, we own in thee! cities and States in thee!
  Our freedom all in thee! our very lives in thee!	  Our freedom all in thee! our very lives in thee!	  Our freedom all in thee! our very lives in thee!	  Our freedom all in thee! our very lives in thee!
			
			
			
			
BOOK XIV	BOOK XIV	BOOK XIV	BOOK XIV
			
			
Song of the Redwood-Tree	Song of the Redwood-Tree	Song of the Redwood-Tree	Song of the Redwood-Tree
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  A California song,	  A California song,	  A California song,	  A California song,
  A prophecy and indirection, a thought impalpable to breathe as air,	  A prophecy and indirection, a thought impalpable to breathe as air,	  A prophecy and indirection, a thought impalpable to breathe as air,	  A prophecy and indirection, a thought impalpable to breathe as air,
  A chorus of dryads, fading, departing, or hamadryads departing,	  A chorus of dryads, fading, departing, or hamadryads departing,	  A chorus of dryads, fading, departing, or hamadryads departing,	  A chorus of dryads, fading, departing, or hamadryads departing,
  A murmuring, fateful, giant voice, out of the earth and sky,	  A murmuring, fateful, giant voice, out of the earth and sky,	  A murmuring, fateful, giant voice, out of the earth and sky,	  A murmuring, fateful, giant voice, out of the earth and sky,
  Voice of a mighty dying tree in the redwood forest dense.	  Voice of a mighty dying tree in the redwood forest dense.	  Voice of a mighty dying tree in the redwood forest dense.	  Voice of a mighty dying tree in the redwood forest dense.
			
  Farewell my brethren,	  Farewell my brethren,	  Farewell my brethren,	  Farewell my brethren,
  Farewell O earth and sky, farewell ye neighboring waters,	  Farewell O earth and sky, farewell ye neighboring waters,	  Farewell O earth and sky, farewell ye neighboring waters,	  Farewell O earth and sky, farewell ye neighboring waters,
  My time has ended, my term has come.	  My time has ended, my term has come.	  My time has ended, my term has come.	  My time has ended, my term has come.
			
  Along the northern coast,	  Along the northern coast,	  Along the northern coast,	  Along the northern coast,
  Just back from the rock-bound shore and the caves,	  Just back from the rock-bound shore and the caves,	  Just back from the rock-bound shore and the caves,	  Just back from the rock-bound shore and the caves,
  In the saline air from the sea in the Mendocino country,	  In the saline air from the sea in the Mendocino country,	  In the saline air from the sea in the Mendocino country,	  In the saline air from the sea in the Mendocino country,
  With the surge for base and accompaniment low and hoarse,	  With the surge for base and accompaniment low and hoarse,	  With the surge for base and accompaniment low and hoarse,	  With the surge for base and accompaniment low and hoarse,
  With crackling blows of axes sounding musically driven by strong arms,	  With crackling blows of axes sounding musically driven by strong arms,	  With crackling blows of axes sounding musically driven by strong arms,	  With crackling blows of axes sounding musically driven by strong arms,
  Riven deep by the sharp tongues of the axes, there in the redwood	  Riven deep by the sharp tongues of the axes, there in the redwood	  Riven deep by the sharp tongues of the axes, there in the redwood	  Riven deep by the sharp tongues of the axes, there in the redwood
      forest dense,	      forest dense,	      forest dense,	      forest dense,
  I heard the might tree its death-chant chanting.	  I heard the might tree its death-chant chanting.	  I heard the might tree its death-chant chanting.	  I heard the might tree its death-chant chanting.
			
  The choppers heard not, the camp shanties echoed not,	  The choppers heard not, the camp shanties echoed not,	  The choppers heard not, the camp shanties echoed not,	  The choppers heard not, the camp shanties echoed not,
  The quick-ear'd teamsters and chain and jack-screw men heard not,	  The quick-ear'd teamsters and chain and jack-screw men heard not,	  The quick-ear'd teamsters and chain and jack-screw men heard not,	  The quick-ear'd teamsters and chain and jack-screw men heard not,
  As the wood-spirits came from their haunts of a thousand years to	  As the wood-spirits came from their haunts of a thousand years to	  As the wood-spirits came from their haunts of a thousand years to	  As the wood-spirits came from their haunts of a thousand years to
      join the refrain,	      join the refrain,	      join the refrain,	      join the refrain,
  But in my soul I plainly heard.	  But in my soul I plainly heard.	  But in my soul I plainly heard.	  But in my soul I plainly heard.
			
  Murmuring out of its myriad leaves,	  Murmuring out of its myriad leaves,	  Murmuring out of its myriad leaves,	  Murmuring out of its myriad leaves,
  Down from its lofty top rising two hundred feet high,	  Down from its lofty top rising two hundred feet high,	  Down from its lofty top rising two hundred feet high,	  Down from its lofty top rising two hundred feet high,
  Out of its stalwart trunk and limbs, out of its foot-thick bark,	  Out of its stalwart trunk and limbs, out of its foot-thick bark,	  Out of its stalwart trunk and limbs, out of its foot-thick bark,	  Out of its stalwart trunk and limbs, out of its foot-thick bark,
  That chant of the seasons and time, chant not of the past only but	  That chant of the seasons and time, chant not of the past only but	  That chant of the seasons and time, chant not of the past only but	  That chant of the seasons and time, chant not of the past only but
      the future.	      the future.	      the future.	      the future.
			
  You untold life of me,	  You untold life of me,	  You untold life of me,	  You untold life of me,
  And all you venerable and innocent joys,	  And all you venerable and innocent joys,	  And all you venerable and innocent joys,	  And all you venerable and innocent joys,
  Perennial hardy life of me with joys 'mid rain and many a summer sun,	  Perennial hardy life of me with joys 'mid rain and many a summer sun,	  Perennial hardy life of me with joys 'mid rain and many a summer sun,	  Perennial hardy life of me with joys 'mid rain and many a summer sun,
  And the white snows and night and the wild winds;	  And the white snows and night and the wild winds;	  And the white snows and night and the wild winds;	  And the white snows and night and the wild winds;
  O the great patient rugged joys, my soul's strong joys unreck'd by man,	  O the great patient rugged joys, my soul's strong joys unreck'd by man,	  O the great patient rugged joys, my soul's strong joys unreck'd by man,	  O the great patient rugged joys, my soul's strong joys unreck'd by man,
  (For know I bear the soul befitting me, I too have consciousness, identity,	  (For know I bear the soul befitting me, I too have consciousness, identity,	  (For know I bear the soul befitting me, I too have consciousness, identity,	  (For know I bear the soul befitting me, I too have consciousness, identity,
  And all the rocks and mountains have, and all the earth,)	  And all the rocks and mountains have, and all the earth,)	  And all the rocks and mountains have, and all the earth,)	  And all the rocks and mountains have, and all the earth,)
  Joys of the life befitting me and brothers mine,	  Joys of the life befitting me and brothers mine,	  Joys of the life befitting me and brothers mine,	  Joys of the life befitting me and brothers mine,
  Our time, our term has come.	  Our time, our term has come.	  Our time, our term has come.	  Our time, our term has come.
			
  Nor yield we mournfully majestic brothers,	  Nor yield we mournfully majestic brothers,	  Nor yield we mournfully majestic brothers,	  Nor yield we mournfully majestic brothers,
  We who have grandly fill'd our time,	  We who have grandly fill'd our time,	  We who have grandly fill'd our time,	  We who have grandly fill'd our time,
  With Nature's calm content, with tacit huge delight,	  With Nature's calm content, with tacit huge delight,	  With Nature's calm content, with tacit huge delight,	  With Nature's calm content, with tacit huge delight,
  We welcome what we wrought for through the past,	  We welcome what we wrought for through the past,	  We welcome what we wrought for through the past,	  We welcome what we wrought for through the past,
  And leave the field for them.	  And leave the field for them.	  And leave the field for them.	  And leave the field for them.
			
  For them predicted long,	  For them predicted long,	  For them predicted long,	  For them predicted long,
  For a superber race, they too to grandly fill their time,	  For a superber race, they too to grandly fill their time,	  For a superber race, they too to grandly fill their time,	  For a superber race, they too to grandly fill their time,
  For them we abdicate, in them ourselves ye forest kings.'	  For them we abdicate, in them ourselves ye forest kings.'	  For them we abdicate, in them ourselves ye forest kings.'	  For them we abdicate, in them ourselves ye forest kings.'
  In them these skies and airs, these mountain peaks, Shasta, Nevadas,	  In them these skies and airs, these mountain peaks, Shasta, Nevadas,	  In them these skies and airs, these mountain peaks, Shasta, Nevadas,	  In them these skies and airs, these mountain peaks, Shasta, Nevadas,
  These huge precipitous cliffs, this amplitude, these valleys, far Yosemite,	  These huge precipitous cliffs, this amplitude, these valleys, far Yosemite,	  These huge precipitous cliffs, this amplitude, these valleys, far Yosemite,	  These huge precipitous cliffs, this amplitude, these valleys, far Yosemite,
  To be in them absorb'd, assimilated.	  To be in them absorb'd, assimilated.	  To be in them absorb'd, assimilated.	  To be in them absorb'd, assimilated.
			
  Then to a loftier strain,	  Then to a loftier strain,	  Then to a loftier strain,	  Then to a loftier strain,
  Still prouder, more ecstatic rose the chant,	  Still prouder, more ecstatic rose the chant,	  Still prouder, more ecstatic rose the chant,	  Still prouder, more ecstatic rose the chant,
  As if the heirs, the deities of the West,	  As if the heirs, the deities of the West,	  As if the heirs, the deities of the West,	  As if the heirs, the deities of the West,
  Joining with master-tongue bore part.	  Joining with master-tongue bore part.	  Joining with master-tongue bore part.	  Joining with master-tongue bore part.
			
  Not wan from Asia's fetiches,	  Not wan from Asia's fetiches,	  Not wan from Asia's fetiches,	  Not wan from Asia's fetiches,
  Nor red from Europe's old dynastic slaughter-house,	  Nor red from Europe's old dynastic slaughter-house,	  Nor red from Europe's old dynastic slaughter-house,	  Nor red from Europe's old dynastic slaughter-house,
  (Area of murder-plots of thrones, with scent left yet of wars and	  (Area of murder-plots of thrones, with scent left yet of wars and	  (Area of murder-plots of thrones, with scent left yet of wars and	  (Area of murder-plots of thrones, with scent left yet of wars and
      scaffolds everywhere,	      scaffolds everywhere,	      scaffolds everywhere,	      scaffolds everywhere,
  But come from Nature's long and harmless throes, peacefully builded thence,	  But come from Nature's long and harmless throes, peacefully builded thence,	  But come from Nature's long and harmless throes, peacefully builded thence,	  But come from Nature's long and harmless throes, peacefully builded thence,
  These virgin lands, lands of the Western shore,	  These virgin lands, lands of the Western shore,	  These virgin lands, lands of the Western shore,	  These virgin lands, lands of the Western shore,
  To the new culminating man, to you, the empire new,	  To the new culminating man, to you, the empire new,	  To the new culminating man, to you, the empire new,	  To the new culminating man, to you, the empire new,
  You promis'd long, we pledge, we dedicate.	  You promis'd long, we pledge, we dedicate.	  You promis'd long, we pledge, we dedicate.	  You promis'd long, we pledge, we dedicate.
			
  You occult deep volitions,	  You occult deep volitions,	  You occult deep volitions,	  You occult deep volitions,
  You average spiritual manhood, purpose of all, pois'd on yourself,	  You average spiritual manhood, purpose of all, pois'd on yourself,	  You average spiritual manhood, purpose of all, pois'd on yourself,	  You average spiritual manhood, purpose of all, pois'd on yourself,
      giving not taking law,	      giving not taking law,	      giving not taking law,	      giving not taking law,
  You womanhood divine, mistress and source of all, whence life and	  You womanhood divine, mistress and source of all, whence life and	  You womanhood divine, mistress and source of all, whence life and	  You womanhood divine, mistress and source of all, whence life and
      love and aught that comes from life and love,	      love and aught that comes from life and love,	      love and aught that comes from life and love,	      love and aught that comes from life and love,
  You unseen moral essence of all the vast materials of America, age	  You unseen moral essence of all the vast materials of America, age	  You unseen moral essence of all the vast materials of America, age	  You unseen moral essence of all the vast materials of America, age
      upon age working in death the same as life,)	      upon age working in death the same as life,)	      upon age working in death the same as life,)	      upon age working in death the same as life,)
  You that, sometimes known, oftener unknown, really shape and mould	  You that, sometimes known, oftener unknown, really shape and mould	  You that, sometimes known, oftener unknown, really shape and mould	  You that, sometimes known, oftener unknown, really shape and mould
      the New World, adjusting it to Time and Space,	      the New World, adjusting it to Time and Space,	      the New World, adjusting it to Time and Space,	      the New World, adjusting it to Time and Space,
  You hidden national will lying in your abysms, conceal'd but ever alert,	  You hidden national will lying in your abysms, conceal'd but ever alert,	  You hidden national will lying in your abysms, conceal'd but ever alert,	  You hidden national will lying in your abysms, conceal'd but ever alert,
  You past and present purposes tenaciously pursued, may-be	  You past and present purposes tenaciously pursued, may-be	  You past and present purposes tenaciously pursued, may-be	  You past and present purposes tenaciously pursued, may-be
      unconscious of yourselves,	      unconscious of yourselves,	      unconscious of yourselves,	      unconscious of yourselves,
  Unswerv'd by all the passing errors, perturbations of the surface;	  Unswerv'd by all the passing errors, perturbations of the surface;	  Unswerv'd by all the passing errors, perturbations of the surface;	  Unswerv'd by all the passing errors, perturbations of the surface;
  You vital, universal, deathless germs, beneath all creeds, arts,	  You vital, universal, deathless germs, beneath all creeds, arts,	  You vital, universal, deathless germs, beneath all creeds, arts,	  You vital, universal, deathless germs, beneath all creeds, arts,
      statutes, literatures,	      statutes, literatures,	      statutes, literatures,	      statutes, literatures,
  Here build your homes for good, establish here, these areas entire,	  Here build your homes for good, establish here, these areas entire,	  Here build your homes for good, establish here, these areas entire,	  Here build your homes for good, establish here, these areas entire,
      lands of the Western shore,	      lands of the Western shore,	      lands of the Western shore,	      lands of the Western shore,
  We pledge, we dedicate to you.	  We pledge, we dedicate to you.	  We pledge, we dedicate to you.	  We pledge, we dedicate to you.
			
  For man of you, your characteristic race,	  For man of you, your characteristic race,	  For man of you, your characteristic race,	  For man of you, your characteristic race,
  Here may he hardy, sweet, gigantic grow, here tower proportionate to Nature,	  Here may he hardy, sweet, gigantic grow, here tower proportionate to Nature,	  Here may he hardy, sweet, gigantic grow, here tower proportionate to Nature,	  Here may he hardy, sweet, gigantic grow, here tower proportionate to Nature,
  Here climb the vast pure spaces unconfined, uncheck'd by wall or roof,	  Here climb the vast pure spaces unconfined, uncheck'd by wall or roof,	  Here climb the vast pure spaces unconfined, uncheck'd by wall or roof,	  Here climb the vast pure spaces unconfined, uncheck'd by wall or roof,
  Here laugh with storm or sun, here joy, here patiently inure,	  Here laugh with storm or sun, here joy, here patiently inure,	  Here laugh with storm or sun, here joy, here patiently inure,	  Here laugh with storm or sun, here joy, here patiently inure,
  Here heed himself, unfold himself, (not others' formulas heed,)	  Here heed himself, unfold himself, (not others' formulas heed,)	  Here heed himself, unfold himself, (not others' formulas heed,)	  Here heed himself, unfold himself, (not others' formulas heed,)
  here fill his time,	  here fill his time,	  here fill his time,	  here fill his time,
  To duly fall, to aid, unreck'd at last,	  To duly fall, to aid, unreck'd at last,	  To duly fall, to aid, unreck'd at last,	  To duly fall, to aid, unreck'd at last,
  To disappear, to serve.	  To disappear, to serve.	  To disappear, to serve.	  To disappear, to serve.
			
  Thus on the northern coast,	  Thus on the northern coast,	  Thus on the northern coast,	  Thus on the northern coast,
  In the echo of teamsters' calls and the clinking chains, and the	  In the echo of teamsters' calls and the clinking chains, and the	  In the echo of teamsters' calls and the clinking chains, and the	  In the echo of teamsters' calls and the clinking chains, and the
      music of choppers' axes,	      music of choppers' axes,	      music of choppers' axes,	      music of choppers' axes,
  The falling trunk and limbs, the crash, the muffled shriek, the groan,	  The falling trunk and limbs, the crash, the muffled shriek, the groan,	  The falling trunk and limbs, the crash, the muffled shriek, the groan,	  The falling trunk and limbs, the crash, the muffled shriek, the groan,
  Such words combined from the redwood-tree, as of voices ecstatic,	  Such words combined from the redwood-tree, as of voices ecstatic,	  Such words combined from the redwood-tree, as of voices ecstatic,	  Such words combined from the redwood-tree, as of voices ecstatic,
      ancient and rustling,	      ancient and rustling,	      ancient and rustling,	      ancient and rustling,
  The century-lasting, unseen dryads, singing, withdrawing,	  The century-lasting, unseen dryads, singing, withdrawing,	  The century-lasting, unseen dryads, singing, withdrawing,	  The century-lasting, unseen dryads, singing, withdrawing,
  All their recesses of forests and mountains leaving,	  All their recesses of forests and mountains leaving,	  All their recesses of forests and mountains leaving,	  All their recesses of forests and mountains leaving,
  From the Cascade range to the Wahsatch, or Idaho far, or Utah,	  From the Cascade range to the Wahsatch, or Idaho far, or Utah,	  From the Cascade range to the Wahsatch, or Idaho far, or Utah,	  From the Cascade range to the Wahsatch, or Idaho far, or Utah,
  To the deities of the modern henceforth yielding,	  To the deities of the modern henceforth yielding,	  To the deities of the modern henceforth yielding,	  To the deities of the modern henceforth yielding,
  The chorus and indications, the vistas of coming humanity, the	  The chorus and indications, the vistas of coming humanity, the	  The chorus and indications, the vistas of coming humanity, the	  The chorus and indications, the vistas of coming humanity, the
      settlements, features all,	      settlements, features all,	      settlements, features all,	      settlements, features all,
  In the Mendocino woods I caught.	  In the Mendocino woods I caught.	  In the Mendocino woods I caught.	  In the Mendocino woods I caught.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  The flashing and golden pageant of California,	  The flashing and golden pageant of California,	  The flashing and golden pageant of California,	  The flashing and golden pageant of California,
  The sudden and gorgeous drama, the sunny and ample lands,	  The sudden and gorgeous drama, the sunny and ample lands,	  The sudden and gorgeous drama, the sunny and ample lands,	  The sudden and gorgeous drama, the sunny and ample lands,
  The long and varied stretch from Puget sound to Colorado south,	  The long and varied stretch from Puget sound to Colorado south,	  The long and varied stretch from Puget sound to Colorado south,	  The long and varied stretch from Puget sound to Colorado south,
  Lands bathed in sweeter, rarer, healthier air, valleys and mountain cliffs,	  Lands bathed in sweeter, rarer, healthier air, valleys and mountain cliffs,	  Lands bathed in sweeter, rarer, healthier air, valleys and mountain cliffs,	  Lands bathed in sweeter, rarer, healthier air, valleys and mountain cliffs,
  The fields of Nature long prepared and fallow, the silent, cyclic chemistry,	  The fields of Nature long prepared and fallow, the silent, cyclic chemistry,	  The fields of Nature long prepared and fallow, the silent, cyclic chemistry,	  The fields of Nature long prepared and fallow, the silent, cyclic chemistry,
  The slow and steady ages plodding, the unoccupied surface ripening,	  The slow and steady ages plodding, the unoccupied surface ripening,	  The slow and steady ages plodding, the unoccupied surface ripening,	  The slow and steady ages plodding, the unoccupied surface ripening,
      the rich ores forming beneath;	      the rich ores forming beneath;	      the rich ores forming beneath;	      the rich ores forming beneath;
  At last the New arriving, assuming, taking possession,	  At last the New arriving, assuming, taking possession,	  At last the New arriving, assuming, taking possession,	  At last the New arriving, assuming, taking possession,
  A swarming and busy race settling and organizing everywhere,	  A swarming and busy race settling and organizing everywhere,	  A swarming and busy race settling and organizing everywhere,	  A swarming and busy race settling and organizing everywhere,
  Ships coming in from the whole round world, and going out to the	  Ships coming in from the whole round world, and going out to the	  Ships coming in from the whole round world, and going out to the	  Ships coming in from the whole round world, and going out to the
      whole world,	      whole world,	      whole world,	      whole world,
  To India and China and Australia and the thousand island paradises	  To India and China and Australia and the thousand island paradises	  To India and China and Australia and the thousand island paradises	  To India and China and Australia and the thousand island paradises
      of the Pacific,	      of the Pacific,	      of the Pacific,	      of the Pacific,
  Populous cities, the latest inventions, the steamers on the rivers,	  Populous cities, the latest inventions, the steamers on the rivers,	  Populous cities, the latest inventions, the steamers on the rivers,	  Populous cities, the latest inventions, the steamers on the rivers,
      the railroads, with many a thrifty farm, with machinery,	      the railroads, with many a thrifty farm, with machinery,	      the railroads, with many a thrifty farm, with machinery,	      the railroads, with many a thrifty farm, with machinery,
  And wool and wheat and the grape, and diggings of yellow gold.	  And wool and wheat and the grape, and diggings of yellow gold.	  And wool and wheat and the grape, and diggings of yellow gold.	  And wool and wheat and the grape, and diggings of yellow gold.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  But more in you than these, lands of the Western shore,	  But more in you than these, lands of the Western shore,	  But more in you than these, lands of the Western shore,	  But more in you than these, lands of the Western shore,
  (These but the means, the implements, the standing-ground,)	  (These but the means, the implements, the standing-ground,)	  (These but the means, the implements, the standing-ground,)	  (These but the means, the implements, the standing-ground,)
  I see in you, certain to come, the promise of thousands of years,	  I see in you, certain to come, the promise of thousands of years,	  I see in you, certain to come, the promise of thousands of years,	  I see in you, certain to come, the promise of thousands of years,
      till now deferr'd,	      till now deferr'd,	      till now deferr'd,	      till now deferr'd,
  Promis'd to be fulfill'd, our common kind, the race.	  Promis'd to be fulfill'd, our common kind, the race.	  Promis'd to be fulfill'd, our common kind, the race.	  Promis'd to be fulfill'd, our common kind, the race.
			
  The new society at last, proportionate to Nature,	  The new society at last, proportionate to Nature,	  The new society at last, proportionate to Nature,	  The new society at last, proportionate to Nature,
  In man of you, more than your mountain peaks or stalwart trees imperial,	  In man of you, more than your mountain peaks or stalwart trees imperial,	  In man of you, more than your mountain peaks or stalwart trees imperial,	  In man of you, more than your mountain peaks or stalwart trees imperial,
  In woman more, far more, than all your gold or vines, or even vital air.	  In woman more, far more, than all your gold or vines, or even vital air.	  In woman more, far more, than all your gold or vines, or even vital air.	  In woman more, far more, than all your gold or vines, or even vital air.
			
  Fresh come, to a new world indeed, yet long prepared,	  Fresh come, to a new world indeed, yet long prepared,	  Fresh come, to a new world indeed, yet long prepared,	  Fresh come, to a new world indeed, yet long prepared,
  I see the genius of the modern, child of the real and ideal,	  I see the genius of the modern, child of the real and ideal,	  I see the genius of the modern, child of the real and ideal,	  I see the genius of the modern, child of the real and ideal,
  Clearing the ground for broad humanity, the true America, heir of	  Clearing the ground for broad humanity, the true America, heir of	  Clearing the ground for broad humanity, the true America, heir of	  Clearing the ground for broad humanity, the true America, heir of
      the past so grand,	      the past so grand,	      the past so grand,	      the past so grand,
  To build a grander future.	  To build a grander future.	  To build a grander future.	  To build a grander future.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XV	BOOK XV	BOOK XV	BOOK XV
			
			
A Song for Occupations	A Song for Occupations	A Song for Occupations	A Song for Occupations
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  A song for occupations!	  A song for occupations!	  A song for occupations!	  A song for occupations!
  In the labor of engines and trades and the labor of fields I find	  In the labor of engines and trades and the labor of fields I find	  In the labor of engines and trades and the labor of fields I find	  In the labor of engines and trades and the labor of fields I find
      the developments,	      the developments,	      the developments,	      the developments,
  And find the eternal meanings.	  And find the eternal meanings.	  And find the eternal meanings.	  And find the eternal meanings.
			
  Workmen and Workwomen!	  Workmen and Workwomen!	  Workmen and Workwomen!	  Workmen and Workwomen!
  Were all educations practical and ornamental well display'd out of	  Were all educations practical and ornamental well display'd out of	  Were all educations practical and ornamental well display'd out of	  Were all educations practical and ornamental well display'd out of
      me, what would it amount to?	      me, what would it amount to?	      me, what would it amount to?	      me, what would it amount to?
  Were I as the head teacher, charitable proprietor, wise statesman,	  Were I as the head teacher, charitable proprietor, wise statesman,	  Were I as the head teacher, charitable proprietor, wise statesman,	  Were I as the head teacher, charitable proprietor, wise statesman,
      what would it amount to?	      what would it amount to?	      what would it amount to?	      what would it amount to?
  Were I to you as the boss employing and paying you, would that satisfy you?	  Were I to you as the boss employing and paying you, would that satisfy you?	  Were I to you as the boss employing and paying you, would that satisfy you?	  Were I to you as the boss employing and paying you, would that satisfy you?
			
  The learn'd, virtuous, benevolent, and the usual terms,	  The learn'd, virtuous, benevolent, and the usual terms,	  The learn'd, virtuous, benevolent, and the usual terms,	  The learn'd, virtuous, benevolent, and the usual terms,
  A man like me and never the usual terms.	  A man like me and never the usual terms.	  A man like me and never the usual terms.	  A man like me and never the usual terms.
			
  Neither a servant nor a master I,	  Neither a servant nor a master I,	  Neither a servant nor a master I,	  Neither a servant nor a master I,
  I take no sooner a large price than a small price, I will have my	  I take no sooner a large price than a small price, I will have my	  I take no sooner a large price than a small price, I will have my	  I take no sooner a large price than a small price, I will have my
      own whoever enjoys me,	      own whoever enjoys me,	      own whoever enjoys me,	      own whoever enjoys me,
  I will be even with you and you shall be even with me.	  I will be even with you and you shall be even with me.	  I will be even with you and you shall be even with me.	  I will be even with you and you shall be even with me.
			
  If you stand at work in a shop I stand as nigh as the nighest in the	  If you stand at work in a shop I stand as nigh as the nighest in the	  If you stand at work in a shop I stand as nigh as the nighest in the	  If you stand at work in a shop I stand as nigh as the nighest in the
      same shop,	      same shop,	      same shop,	      same shop,
  If you bestow gifts on your brother or dearest friend I demand as	  If you bestow gifts on your brother or dearest friend I demand as	  If you bestow gifts on your brother or dearest friend I demand as	  If you bestow gifts on your brother or dearest friend I demand as
      good as your brother or dearest friend,	      good as your brother or dearest friend,	      good as your brother or dearest friend,	      good as your brother or dearest friend,
  If your lover, husband, wife, is welcome by day or night, I must be	  If your lover, husband, wife, is welcome by day or night, I must be	  If your lover, husband, wife, is welcome by day or night, I must be	  If your lover, husband, wife, is welcome by day or night, I must be
      personally as welcome,	      personally as welcome,	      personally as welcome,	      personally as welcome,
  If you become degraded, criminal, ill, then I become so for your sake,	  If you become degraded, criminal, ill, then I become so for your sake,	  If you become degraded, criminal, ill, then I become so for your sake,	  If you become degraded, criminal, ill, then I become so for your sake,
  If you remember your foolish and outlaw'd deeds, do you think I	  If you remember your foolish and outlaw'd deeds, do you think I	  If you remember your foolish and outlaw'd deeds, do you think I	  If you remember your foolish and outlaw'd deeds, do you think I
      cannot remember my own foolish and outlaw'd deeds?	      cannot remember my own foolish and outlaw'd deeds?	      cannot remember my own foolish and outlaw'd deeds?	      cannot remember my own foolish and outlaw'd deeds?
  If you carouse at the table I carouse at the opposite side of the table,	  If you carouse at the table I carouse at the opposite side of the table,	  If you carouse at the table I carouse at the opposite side of the table,	  If you carouse at the table I carouse at the opposite side of the table,
  If you meet some stranger in the streets and love him or her, why	  If you meet some stranger in the streets and love him or her, why	  If you meet some stranger in the streets and love him or her, why	  If you meet some stranger in the streets and love him or her, why
      I often meet strangers in the street and love them.	      I often meet strangers in the street and love them.	      I often meet strangers in the street and love them.	      I often meet strangers in the street and love them.
			
  Why what have you thought of yourself?	  Why what have you thought of yourself?	  Why what have you thought of yourself?	  Why what have you thought of yourself?
  Is it you then that thought yourself less?	  Is it you then that thought yourself less?	  Is it you then that thought yourself less?	  Is it you then that thought yourself less?
  Is it you that thought the President greater than you?	  Is it you that thought the President greater than you?	  Is it you that thought the President greater than you?	  Is it you that thought the President greater than you?
  Or the rich better off than you? or the educated wiser than you?	  Or the rich better off than you? or the educated wiser than you?	  Or the rich better off than you? or the educated wiser than you?	  Or the rich better off than you? or the educated wiser than you?
			
  (Because you are greasy or pimpled, or were once drunk, or a thief,	  (Because you are greasy or pimpled, or were once drunk, or a thief,	  (Because you are greasy or pimpled, or were once drunk, or a thief,	  (Because you are greasy or pimpled, or were once drunk, or a thief,
  Or that you are diseas'd, or rheumatic, or a prostitute,	  Or that you are diseas'd, or rheumatic, or a prostitute,	  Or that you are diseas'd, or rheumatic, or a prostitute,	  Or that you are diseas'd, or rheumatic, or a prostitute,
  Or from frivolity or impotence, or that you are no scholar and never	  Or from frivolity or impotence, or that you are no scholar and never	  Or from frivolity or impotence, or that you are no scholar and never	  Or from frivolity or impotence, or that you are no scholar and never
      saw your name in print,	      saw your name in print,	      saw your name in print,	      saw your name in print,
  Do you give in that you are any less immortal?)	  Do you give in that you are any less immortal?)	  Do you give in that you are any less immortal?)	  Do you give in that you are any less immortal?)
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Souls of men and women! it is not you I call unseen, unheard,	  Souls of men and women! it is not you I call unseen, unheard,	  Souls of men and women! it is not you I call unseen, unheard,	  Souls of men and women! it is not you I call unseen, unheard,
      untouchable and untouching,	      untouchable and untouching,	      untouchable and untouching,	      untouchable and untouching,
  It is not you I go argue pro and con about, and to settle whether	  It is not you I go argue pro and con about, and to settle whether	  It is not you I go argue pro and con about, and to settle whether	  It is not you I go argue pro and con about, and to settle whether
      you are alive or no,	      you are alive or no,	      you are alive or no,	      you are alive or no,
  I own publicly who you are, if nobody else owns.	  I own publicly who you are, if nobody else owns.	  I own publicly who you are, if nobody else owns.	  I own publicly who you are, if nobody else owns.
			
  Grown, half-grown and babe, of this country and every country,	  Grown, half-grown and babe, of this country and every country,	  Grown, half-grown and babe, of this country and every country,	  Grown, half-grown and babe, of this country and every country,
      in-doors and out-doors, one just as much as the other, I see,	      in-doors and out-doors, one just as much as the other, I see,	      in-doors and out-doors, one just as much as the other, I see,	      in-doors and out-doors, one just as much as the other, I see,
  And all else behind or through them.	  And all else behind or through them.	  And all else behind or through them.	  And all else behind or through them.
			
  The wife, and she is not one jot less than the husband,	  The wife, and she is not one jot less than the husband,	  The wife, and she is not one jot less than the husband,	  The wife, and she is not one jot less than the husband,
  The daughter, and she is just as good as the son,	  The daughter, and she is just as good as the son,	  The daughter, and she is just as good as the son,	  The daughter, and she is just as good as the son,
  The mother, and she is every bit as much as the father.	  The mother, and she is every bit as much as the father.	  The mother, and she is every bit as much as the father.	  The mother, and she is every bit as much as the father.
			
  Offspring of ignorant and poor, boys apprenticed to trades,	  Offspring of ignorant and poor, boys apprenticed to trades,	  Offspring of ignorant and poor, boys apprenticed to trades,	  Offspring of ignorant and poor, boys apprenticed to trades,
  Young fellows working on farms and old fellows working on farms,	  Young fellows working on farms and old fellows working on farms,	  Young fellows working on farms and old fellows working on farms,	  Young fellows working on farms and old fellows working on farms,
  Sailor-men, merchant-men, coasters, immigrants,	  Sailor-men, merchant-men, coasters, immigrants,	  Sailor-men, merchant-men, coasters, immigrants,	  Sailor-men, merchant-men, coasters, immigrants,
  All these I see, but nigher and farther the same I see,	  All these I see, but nigher and farther the same I see,	  All these I see, but nigher and farther the same I see,	  All these I see, but nigher and farther the same I see,
  None shall escape me and none shall wish to escape me.	  None shall escape me and none shall wish to escape me.	  None shall escape me and none shall wish to escape me.	  None shall escape me and none shall wish to escape me.
			
  I bring what you much need yet always have,	  I bring what you much need yet always have,	  I bring what you much need yet always have,	  I bring what you much need yet always have,
  Not money, amours, dress, eating, erudition, but as good,	  Not money, amours, dress, eating, erudition, but as good,	  Not money, amours, dress, eating, erudition, but as good,	  Not money, amours, dress, eating, erudition, but as good,
  I send no agent or medium, offer no representative of value, but	  I send no agent or medium, offer no representative of value, but	  I send no agent or medium, offer no representative of value, but	  I send no agent or medium, offer no representative of value, but
      offer the value itself.	      offer the value itself.	      offer the value itself.	      offer the value itself.
			
  There is something that comes to one now and perpetually,	  There is something that comes to one now and perpetually,	  There is something that comes to one now and perpetually,	  There is something that comes to one now and perpetually,
  It is not what is printed, preach'd, discussed, it eludes discussion	  It is not what is printed, preach'd, discussed, it eludes discussion	  It is not what is printed, preach'd, discussed, it eludes discussion	  It is not what is printed, preach'd, discussed, it eludes discussion
      and print,	      and print,	      and print,	      and print,
  It is not to be put in a book, it is not in this book,	  It is not to be put in a book, it is not in this book,	  It is not to be put in a book, it is not in this book,	  It is not to be put in a book, it is not in this book,
  It is for you whoever you are, it is no farther from you than your	  It is for you whoever you are, it is no farther from you than your	  It is for you whoever you are, it is no farther from you than your	  It is for you whoever you are, it is no farther from you than your
      hearing and sight are from you,	      hearing and sight are from you,	      hearing and sight are from you,	      hearing and sight are from you,
  It is hinted by nearest, commonest, readiest, it is ever provoked by them.	  It is hinted by nearest, commonest, readiest, it is ever provoked by them.	  It is hinted by nearest, commonest, readiest, it is ever provoked by them.	  It is hinted by nearest, commonest, readiest, it is ever provoked by them.
			
  You may read in many languages, yet read nothing about it,	  You may read in many languages, yet read nothing about it,	  You may read in many languages, yet read nothing about it,	  You may read in many languages, yet read nothing about it,
  You may read the President's message and read nothing about it there,	  You may read the President's message and read nothing about it there,	  You may read the President's message and read nothing about it there,	  You may read the President's message and read nothing about it there,
  Nothing in the reports from the State department or Treasury	  Nothing in the reports from the State department or Treasury	  Nothing in the reports from the State department or Treasury	  Nothing in the reports from the State department or Treasury
      department, or in the daily papers or weekly papers,	      department, or in the daily papers or weekly papers,	      department, or in the daily papers or weekly papers,	      department, or in the daily papers or weekly papers,
  Or in the census or revenue returns, prices current, or any accounts	  Or in the census or revenue returns, prices current, or any accounts	  Or in the census or revenue returns, prices current, or any accounts	  Or in the census or revenue returns, prices current, or any accounts
      of stock.	      of stock.	      of stock.	      of stock.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  The sun and stars that float in the open air,	  The sun and stars that float in the open air,	  The sun and stars that float in the open air,	  The sun and stars that float in the open air,
  The apple-shaped earth and we upon it, surely the drift of them is	  The apple-shaped earth and we upon it, surely the drift of them is	  The apple-shaped earth and we upon it, surely the drift of them is	  The apple-shaped earth and we upon it, surely the drift of them is
      something grand,	      something grand,	      something grand,	      something grand,
  I do not know what it is except that it is grand, and that it is happiness,	  I do not know what it is except that it is grand, and that it is happiness,	  I do not know what it is except that it is grand, and that it is happiness,	  I do not know what it is except that it is grand, and that it is happiness,
  And that the enclosing purport of us here is not a speculation or	  And that the enclosing purport of us here is not a speculation or	  And that the enclosing purport of us here is not a speculation or	  And that the enclosing purport of us here is not a speculation or
      bon-mot or reconnoissance,	      bon-mot or reconnoissance,	      bon-mot or reconnoissance,	      bon-mot or reconnoissance,
  And that it is not something which by luck may turn out well for us,	  And that it is not something which by luck may turn out well for us,	  And that it is not something which by luck may turn out well for us,	  And that it is not something which by luck may turn out well for us,
      and without luck must be a failure for us,	      and without luck must be a failure for us,	      and without luck must be a failure for us,	      and without luck must be a failure for us,
  And not something which may yet be retracted in a certain contingency.	  And not something which may yet be retracted in a certain contingency.	  And not something which may yet be retracted in a certain contingency.	  And not something which may yet be retracted in a certain contingency.
			
  The light and shade, the curious sense of body and identity, the	  The light and shade, the curious sense of body and identity, the	  The light and shade, the curious sense of body and identity, the	  The light and shade, the curious sense of body and identity, the
      greed that with perfect complaisance devours all things,	      greed that with perfect complaisance devours all things,	      greed that with perfect complaisance devours all things,	      greed that with perfect complaisance devours all things,
  The endless pride and outstretching of man, unspeakable joys and sorrows,	  The endless pride and outstretching of man, unspeakable joys and sorrows,	  The endless pride and outstretching of man, unspeakable joys and sorrows,	  The endless pride and outstretching of man, unspeakable joys and sorrows,
  The wonder every one sees in every one else he sees, and the wonders	  The wonder every one sees in every one else he sees, and the wonders	  The wonder every one sees in every one else he sees, and the wonders	  The wonder every one sees in every one else he sees, and the wonders
      that fill each minute of time forever,	      that fill each minute of time forever,	      that fill each minute of time forever,	      that fill each minute of time forever,
  What have you reckon'd them for, camerado?	  What have you reckon'd them for, camerado?	  What have you reckon'd them for, camerado?	  What have you reckon'd them for, camerado?
  Have you reckon'd them for your trade or farm-work? or for the	  Have you reckon'd them for your trade or farm-work? or for the	  Have you reckon'd them for your trade or farm-work? or for the	  Have you reckon'd them for your trade or farm-work? or for the
      profits of your store?	      profits of your store?	      profits of your store?	      profits of your store?
  Or to achieve yourself a position? or to fill a gentleman's leisure,	  Or to achieve yourself a position? or to fill a gentleman's leisure,	  Or to achieve yourself a position? or to fill a gentleman's leisure,	  Or to achieve yourself a position? or to fill a gentleman's leisure,
      or a lady's leisure?	      or a lady's leisure?	      or a lady's leisure?	      or a lady's leisure?
			
  Have you reckon'd that the landscape took substance and form that it	  Have you reckon'd that the landscape took substance and form that it	  Have you reckon'd that the landscape took substance and form that it	  Have you reckon'd that the landscape took substance and form that it
      might be painted in a picture?	      might be painted in a picture?	      might be painted in a picture?	      might be painted in a picture?
  Or men and women that they might be written of, and songs sung?	  Or men and women that they might be written of, and songs sung?	  Or men and women that they might be written of, and songs sung?	  Or men and women that they might be written of, and songs sung?
  Or the attraction of gravity, and the great laws and harmonious combinations	  Or the attraction of gravity, and the great laws and harmonious combinations	  Or the attraction of gravity, and the great laws and harmonious combinations	  Or the attraction of gravity, and the great laws and harmonious combinations
      and the fluids of the air, as subjects for the savans?	      and the fluids of the air, as subjects for the savans?	      and the fluids of the air, as subjects for the savans?	      and the fluids of the air, as subjects for the savans?
  Or the brown land and the blue sea for maps and charts?	  Or the brown land and the blue sea for maps and charts?	  Or the brown land and the blue sea for maps and charts?	  Or the brown land and the blue sea for maps and charts?
  Or the stars to be put in constellations and named fancy names?	  Or the stars to be put in constellations and named fancy names?	  Or the stars to be put in constellations and named fancy names?	  Or the stars to be put in constellations and named fancy names?
  Or that the growth of seeds is for agricultural tables, or	  Or that the growth of seeds is for agricultural tables, or	  Or that the growth of seeds is for agricultural tables, or	  Or that the growth of seeds is for agricultural tables, or
      agriculture itself?	      agriculture itself?	      agriculture itself?	      agriculture itself?
			
  Old institutions, these arts, libraries, legends, collections, and	  Old institutions, these arts, libraries, legends, collections, and	  Old institutions, these arts, libraries, legends, collections, and	  Old institutions, these arts, libraries, legends, collections, and
      the practice handed along in manufactures, will we rate them so high?	      the practice handed along in manufactures, will we rate them so high?	      the practice handed along in manufactures, will we rate them so high?	      the practice handed along in manufactures, will we rate them so high?
  Will we rate our cash and business high? I have no objection,	  Will we rate our cash and business high? I have no objection,	  Will we rate our cash and business high? I have no objection,	  Will we rate our cash and business high? I have no objection,
  I rate them as high as the highest--then a child born of a woman and	  I rate them as high as the highest--then a child born of a woman and	  I rate them as high as the highest--then a child born of a woman and	  I rate them as high as the highest--then a child born of a woman and
      man I rate beyond all rate.	      man I rate beyond all rate.	      man I rate beyond all rate.	      man I rate beyond all rate.
			
  We thought our Union grand, and our Constitution grand,	  We thought our Union grand, and our Constitution grand,	  We thought our Union grand, and our Constitution grand,	  We thought our Union grand, and our Constitution grand,
  I do not say they are not grand and good, for they are,	  I do not say they are not grand and good, for they are,	  I do not say they are not grand and good, for they are,	  I do not say they are not grand and good, for they are,
  I am this day just as much in love with them as you,	  I am this day just as much in love with them as you,	  I am this day just as much in love with them as you,	  I am this day just as much in love with them as you,
  Then I am in love with You, and with all my fellows upon the earth.	  Then I am in love with You, and with all my fellows upon the earth.	  Then I am in love with You, and with all my fellows upon the earth.	  Then I am in love with You, and with all my fellows upon the earth.
			
  We consider bibles and religions divine--I do not say they are not divine,	  We consider bibles and religions divine--I do not say they are not divine,	  We consider bibles and religions divine--I do not say they are not divine,	  We consider bibles and religions divine--I do not say they are not divine,
  I say they have all grown out of you, and may grow out of you still,	  I say they have all grown out of you, and may grow out of you still,	  I say they have all grown out of you, and may grow out of you still,	  I say they have all grown out of you, and may grow out of you still,
  It is not they who give the life, it is you who give the life,	  It is not they who give the life, it is you who give the life,	  It is not they who give the life, it is you who give the life,	  It is not they who give the life, it is you who give the life,
  Leaves are not more shed from the trees, or trees from the earth,	  Leaves are not more shed from the trees, or trees from the earth,	  Leaves are not more shed from the trees, or trees from the earth,	  Leaves are not more shed from the trees, or trees from the earth,
      than they are shed out of you.	      than they are shed out of you.	      than they are shed out of you.	      than they are shed out of you.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  The sum of all known reverence I add up in you whoever you are,	  The sum of all known reverence I add up in you whoever you are,	  The sum of all known reverence I add up in you whoever you are,	  The sum of all known reverence I add up in you whoever you are,
  The President is there in the White House for you, it is not you who	  The President is there in the White House for you, it is not you who	  The President is there in the White House for you, it is not you who	  The President is there in the White House for you, it is not you who
      are here for him,	      are here for him,	      are here for him,	      are here for him,
  The Secretaries act in their bureaus for you, not you here for them,	  The Secretaries act in their bureaus for you, not you here for them,	  The Secretaries act in their bureaus for you, not you here for them,	  The Secretaries act in their bureaus for you, not you here for them,
  The Congress convenes every Twelfth-month for you,	  The Congress convenes every Twelfth-month for you,	  The Congress convenes every Twelfth-month for you,	  The Congress convenes every Twelfth-month for you,
  Laws, courts, the forming of States, the charters of cities, the	  Laws, courts, the forming of States, the charters of cities, the	  Laws, courts, the forming of States, the charters of cities, the	  Laws, courts, the forming of States, the charters of cities, the
      going and coming of commerce and malls, are all for you.	      going and coming of commerce and malls, are all for you.	      going and coming of commerce and malls, are all for you.	      going and coming of commerce and malls, are all for you.
			
  List close my scholars dear,	  List close my scholars dear,	  List close my scholars dear,	  List close my scholars dear,
  Doctrines, politics and civilization exurge from you,	  Doctrines, politics and civilization exurge from you,	  Doctrines, politics and civilization exurge from you,	  Doctrines, politics and civilization exurge from you,
  Sculpture and monuments and any thing inscribed anywhere are tallied in you,	  Sculpture and monuments and any thing inscribed anywhere are tallied in you,	  Sculpture and monuments and any thing inscribed anywhere are tallied in you,	  Sculpture and monuments and any thing inscribed anywhere are tallied in you,
  The gist of histories and statistics as far back as the records	  The gist of histories and statistics as far back as the records	  The gist of histories and statistics as far back as the records	  The gist of histories and statistics as far back as the records
      reach is in you this hour, and myths and tales the same,	      reach is in you this hour, and myths and tales the same,	      reach is in you this hour, and myths and tales the same,	      reach is in you this hour, and myths and tales the same,
  If you were not breathing and walking here, where would they all be?	  If you were not breathing and walking here, where would they all be?	  If you were not breathing and walking here, where would they all be?	  If you were not breathing and walking here, where would they all be?
  The most renown'd poems would be ashes, orations and plays would	  The most renown'd poems would be ashes, orations and plays would	  The most renown'd poems would be ashes, orations and plays would	  The most renown'd poems would be ashes, orations and plays would
      be vacuums.	      be vacuums.	      be vacuums.	      be vacuums.
			
  All architecture is what you do to it when you look upon it,	  All architecture is what you do to it when you look upon it,	  All architecture is what you do to it when you look upon it,	  All architecture is what you do to it when you look upon it,
  (Did you think it was in the white or gray stone? or the lines of	  (Did you think it was in the white or gray stone? or the lines of	  (Did you think it was in the white or gray stone? or the lines of	  (Did you think it was in the white or gray stone? or the lines of
      the arches and cornices?)	      the arches and cornices?)	      the arches and cornices?)	      the arches and cornices?)
			
  All music is what awakes from you when you are reminded by the instruments,	  All music is what awakes from you when you are reminded by the instruments,	  All music is what awakes from you when you are reminded by the instruments,	  All music is what awakes from you when you are reminded by the instruments,
  It is not the violins and the cornets, it is not the oboe nor the	  It is not the violins and the cornets, it is not the oboe nor the	  It is not the violins and the cornets, it is not the oboe nor the	  It is not the violins and the cornets, it is not the oboe nor the
      beating drums, nor the score of the baritone singer singing his	      beating drums, nor the score of the baritone singer singing his	      beating drums, nor the score of the baritone singer singing his	      beating drums, nor the score of the baritone singer singing his
      sweet romanza, nor that of the men's chorus, nor that of the	      sweet romanza, nor that of the men's chorus, nor that of the	      sweet romanza, nor that of the men's chorus, nor that of the	      sweet romanza, nor that of the men's chorus, nor that of the
      women's chorus,	      women's chorus,	      women's chorus,	      women's chorus,
  It is nearer and farther than they.	  It is nearer and farther than they.	  It is nearer and farther than they.	  It is nearer and farther than they.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Will the whole come back then?	  Will the whole come back then?	  Will the whole come back then?	  Will the whole come back then?
  Can each see signs of the best by a look in the looking-glass? is	  Can each see signs of the best by a look in the looking-glass? is	  Can each see signs of the best by a look in the looking-glass? is	  Can each see signs of the best by a look in the looking-glass? is
      there nothing greater or more?	      there nothing greater or more?	      there nothing greater or more?	      there nothing greater or more?
  Does all sit there with you, with the mystic unseen soul?	  Does all sit there with you, with the mystic unseen soul?	  Does all sit there with you, with the mystic unseen soul?	  Does all sit there with you, with the mystic unseen soul?
			
  Strange and hard that paradox true I give,	  Strange and hard that paradox true I give,	  Strange and hard that paradox true I give,	  Strange and hard that paradox true I give,
  Objects gross and the unseen soul are one.	  Objects gross and the unseen soul are one.	  Objects gross and the unseen soul are one.	  Objects gross and the unseen soul are one.
			
  House-building, measuring, sawing the boards,	  House-building, measuring, sawing the boards,	  House-building, measuring, sawing the boards,	  House-building, measuring, sawing the boards,
  Blacksmithing, glass-blowing, nail-making, coopering, tin-roofing,	  Blacksmithing, glass-blowing, nail-making, coopering, tin-roofing,	  Blacksmithing, glass-blowing, nail-making, coopering, tin-roofing,	  Blacksmithing, glass-blowing, nail-making, coopering, tin-roofing,
      shingle-dressing,	      shingle-dressing,	      shingle-dressing,	      shingle-dressing,
  Ship-joining, dock-building, fish-curing, flagging of sidewalks by flaggers,	  Ship-joining, dock-building, fish-curing, flagging of sidewalks by flaggers,	  Ship-joining, dock-building, fish-curing, flagging of sidewalks by flaggers,	  Ship-joining, dock-building, fish-curing, flagging of sidewalks by flaggers,
  The pump, the pile-driver, the great derrick, the coal-kiln and brickkiln,	  The pump, the pile-driver, the great derrick, the coal-kiln and brickkiln,	  The pump, the pile-driver, the great derrick, the coal-kiln and brickkiln,	  The pump, the pile-driver, the great derrick, the coal-kiln and brickkiln,
  Coal-mines and all that is down there, the lamps in the darkness,	  Coal-mines and all that is down there, the lamps in the darkness,	  Coal-mines and all that is down there, the lamps in the darkness,	  Coal-mines and all that is down there, the lamps in the darkness,
      echoes, songs, what meditations, what vast native thoughts	      echoes, songs, what meditations, what vast native thoughts	      echoes, songs, what meditations, what vast native thoughts	      echoes, songs, what meditations, what vast native thoughts
      looking through smutch'd faces,	      looking through smutch'd faces,	      looking through smutch'd faces,	      looking through smutch'd faces,
  Iron-works, forge-fires in the mountains or by river-banks, men	  Iron-works, forge-fires in the mountains or by river-banks, men	  Iron-works, forge-fires in the mountains or by river-banks, men	  Iron-works, forge-fires in the mountains or by river-banks, men
      around feeling the melt with huge crowbars, lumps of ore, the	      around feeling the melt with huge crowbars, lumps of ore, the	      around feeling the melt with huge crowbars, lumps of ore, the	      around feeling the melt with huge crowbars, lumps of ore, the
      due combining of ore, limestone, coal,	      due combining of ore, limestone, coal,	      due combining of ore, limestone, coal,	      due combining of ore, limestone, coal,
  The blast-furnace and the puddling-furnace, the loup-lump at the	  The blast-furnace and the puddling-furnace, the loup-lump at the	  The blast-furnace and the puddling-furnace, the loup-lump at the	  The blast-furnace and the puddling-furnace, the loup-lump at the
      bottom of the melt at last, the rolling-mill, the stumpy bars	      bottom of the melt at last, the rolling-mill, the stumpy bars	      bottom of the melt at last, the rolling-mill, the stumpy bars	      bottom of the melt at last, the rolling-mill, the stumpy bars
      of pig-iron, the strong clean-shaped Trail for railroads,	      of pig-iron, the strong clean-shaped Trail for railroads,	      of pig-iron, the strong clean-shaped Trail for railroads,	      of pig-iron, the strong clean-shaped Trail for railroads,
  Oil-works, silk-works, white-lead-works, the sugar-house,	  Oil-works, silk-works, white-lead-works, the sugar-house,	  Oil-works, silk-works, white-lead-works, the sugar-house,	  Oil-works, silk-works, white-lead-works, the sugar-house,
      steam-saws, the great mills and factories,	      steam-saws, the great mills and factories,	      steam-saws, the great mills and factories,	      steam-saws, the great mills and factories,
  Stone-cutting, shapely trimmings for facades or window or door-lintels,	  Stone-cutting, shapely trimmings for facades or window or door-lintels,	  Stone-cutting, shapely trimmings for facades or window or door-lintels,	  Stone-cutting, shapely trimmings for facades or window or door-lintels,
      the mallet, the tooth-chisel, the jib to protect the thumb,	      the mallet, the tooth-chisel, the jib to protect the thumb,	      the mallet, the tooth-chisel, the jib to protect the thumb,	      the mallet, the tooth-chisel, the jib to protect the thumb,
  The calking-iron, the kettle of boiling vault-cement, and the fire	  The calking-iron, the kettle of boiling vault-cement, and the fire	  The calking-iron, the kettle of boiling vault-cement, and the fire	  The calking-iron, the kettle of boiling vault-cement, and the fire
      under the kettle,	      under the kettle,	      under the kettle,	      under the kettle,
  The cotton-bale, the stevedore's hook, the saw and buck of the	  The cotton-bale, the stevedore's hook, the saw and buck of the	  The cotton-bale, the stevedore's hook, the saw and buck of the	  The cotton-bale, the stevedore's hook, the saw and buck of the
      sawyer, the mould of the moulder, the working-knife of the	      sawyer, the mould of the moulder, the working-knife of the	      sawyer, the mould of the moulder, the working-knife of the	      sawyer, the mould of the moulder, the working-knife of the
      butcher, the ice-saw, and all the work with ice,	      butcher, the ice-saw, and all the work with ice,	      butcher, the ice-saw, and all the work with ice,	      butcher, the ice-saw, and all the work with ice,
  The work and tools of the rigger, grappler, sail-maker, block-maker,	  The work and tools of the rigger, grappler, sail-maker, block-maker,	  The work and tools of the rigger, grappler, sail-maker, block-maker,	  The work and tools of the rigger, grappler, sail-maker, block-maker,
  Goods of gutta-percha, papier-mache, colors, brushes, brush-making,	  Goods of gutta-percha, papier-mache, colors, brushes, brush-making,	  Goods of gutta-percha, papier-mache, colors, brushes, brush-making,	  Goods of gutta-percha, papier-mache, colors, brushes, brush-making,
      glazier's implements,	      glazier's implements,	      glazier's implements,	      glazier's implements,
  The veneer and glue-pot, the confectioner's ornaments, the decanter	  The veneer and glue-pot, the confectioner's ornaments, the decanter	  The veneer and glue-pot, the confectioner's ornaments, the decanter	  The veneer and glue-pot, the confectioner's ornaments, the decanter
      and glasses, the shears and flat-iron,	      and glasses, the shears and flat-iron,	      and glasses, the shears and flat-iron,	      and glasses, the shears and flat-iron,
  The awl and knee-strap, the pint measure and quart measure, the	  The awl and knee-strap, the pint measure and quart measure, the	  The awl and knee-strap, the pint measure and quart measure, the	  The awl and knee-strap, the pint measure and quart measure, the
      counter and stool, the writing-pen of quill or metal, the making	      counter and stool, the writing-pen of quill or metal, the making	      counter and stool, the writing-pen of quill or metal, the making	      counter and stool, the writing-pen of quill or metal, the making
      of all sorts of edged tools,	      of all sorts of edged tools,	      of all sorts of edged tools,	      of all sorts of edged tools,
  The brewery, brewing, the malt, the vats, every thing that is done	  The brewery, brewing, the malt, the vats, every thing that is done	  The brewery, brewing, the malt, the vats, every thing that is done	  The brewery, brewing, the malt, the vats, every thing that is done
      by brewers, wine-makers, vinegar-makers,	      by brewers, wine-makers, vinegar-makers,	      by brewers, wine-makers, vinegar-makers,	      by brewers, wine-makers, vinegar-makers,
  Leather-dressing, coach-making, boiler-making, rope-twisting,	  Leather-dressing, coach-making, boiler-making, rope-twisting,	  Leather-dressing, coach-making, boiler-making, rope-twisting,	  Leather-dressing, coach-making, boiler-making, rope-twisting,
      distilling, sign-painting, lime-burning, cotton-picking,	      distilling, sign-painting, lime-burning, cotton-picking,	      distilling, sign-painting, lime-burning, cotton-picking,	      distilling, sign-painting, lime-burning, cotton-picking,
      electroplating, electrotyping, stereotyping,	      electroplating, electrotyping, stereotyping,	      electroplating, electrotyping, stereotyping,	      electroplating, electrotyping, stereotyping,
  Stave-machines, planing-machines, reaping-machines,	  Stave-machines, planing-machines, reaping-machines,	  Stave-machines, planing-machines, reaping-machines,	  Stave-machines, planing-machines, reaping-machines,
      ploughing-machines, thrashing-machines, steam wagons,	      ploughing-machines, thrashing-machines, steam wagons,	      ploughing-machines, thrashing-machines, steam wagons,	      ploughing-machines, thrashing-machines, steam wagons,
  The cart of the carman, the omnibus, the ponderous dray,	  The cart of the carman, the omnibus, the ponderous dray,	  The cart of the carman, the omnibus, the ponderous dray,	  The cart of the carman, the omnibus, the ponderous dray,
  Pyrotechny, letting off color'd fireworks at night, fancy figures and jets;	  Pyrotechny, letting off color'd fireworks at night, fancy figures and jets;	  Pyrotechny, letting off color'd fireworks at night, fancy figures and jets;	  Pyrotechny, letting off color'd fireworks at night, fancy figures and jets;
  Beef on the butcher's stall, the slaughter-house of the butcher, the	  Beef on the butcher's stall, the slaughter-house of the butcher, the	  Beef on the butcher's stall, the slaughter-house of the butcher, the	  Beef on the butcher's stall, the slaughter-house of the butcher, the
      butcher in his killing-clothes,	      butcher in his killing-clothes,	      butcher in his killing-clothes,	      butcher in his killing-clothes,
  The pens of live pork, the killing-hammer, the hog-hook, the	  The pens of live pork, the killing-hammer, the hog-hook, the	  The pens of live pork, the killing-hammer, the hog-hook, the	  The pens of live pork, the killing-hammer, the hog-hook, the
      scalder's tub, gutting, the cutter's cleaver, the packer's maul,	      scalder's tub, gutting, the cutter's cleaver, the packer's maul,	      scalder's tub, gutting, the cutter's cleaver, the packer's maul,	      scalder's tub, gutting, the cutter's cleaver, the packer's maul,
      and the plenteous winterwork of pork-packing,	      and the plenteous winterwork of pork-packing,	      and the plenteous winterwork of pork-packing,	      and the plenteous winterwork of pork-packing,
  Flour-works, grinding of wheat, rye, maize, rice, the barrels and	  Flour-works, grinding of wheat, rye, maize, rice, the barrels and	  Flour-works, grinding of wheat, rye, maize, rice, the barrels and	  Flour-works, grinding of wheat, rye, maize, rice, the barrels and
      the half and quarter barrels, the loaded barges, the high piles	      the half and quarter barrels, the loaded barges, the high piles	      the half and quarter barrels, the loaded barges, the high piles	      the half and quarter barrels, the loaded barges, the high piles
      on wharves and levees,	      on wharves and levees,	      on wharves and levees,	      on wharves and levees,
  The men and the work of the men on ferries, railroads, coasters,	  The men and the work of the men on ferries, railroads, coasters,	  The men and the work of the men on ferries, railroads, coasters,	  The men and the work of the men on ferries, railroads, coasters,
      fish-boats, canals;	      fish-boats, canals;	      fish-boats, canals;	      fish-boats, canals;
  The hourly routine of your own or any man's life, the shop, yard,	  The hourly routine of your own or any man's life, the shop, yard,	  The hourly routine of your own or any man's life, the shop, yard,	  The hourly routine of your own or any man's life, the shop, yard,
      store, or factory,	      store, or factory,	      store, or factory,	      store, or factory,
  These shows all near you by day and night--workman! whoever you	  These shows all near you by day and night--workman! whoever you	  These shows all near you by day and night--workman! whoever you	  These shows all near you by day and night--workman! whoever you
      are, your daily life!	      are, your daily life!	      are, your daily life!	      are, your daily life!
			
  In that and them the heft of the heaviest--in that and them far more	  In that and them the heft of the heaviest--in that and them far more	  In that and them the heft of the heaviest--in that and them far more	  In that and them the heft of the heaviest--in that and them far more
      than you estimated, (and far less also,)	      than you estimated, (and far less also,)	      than you estimated, (and far less also,)	      than you estimated, (and far less also,)
  In them realities for you and me, in them poems for you and me,	  In them realities for you and me, in them poems for you and me,	  In them realities for you and me, in them poems for you and me,	  In them realities for you and me, in them poems for you and me,
  In them, not yourself-you and your soul enclose all things,	  In them, not yourself-you and your soul enclose all things,	  In them, not yourself-you and your soul enclose all things,	  In them, not yourself-you and your soul enclose all things,
      regardless of estimation,	      regardless of estimation,	      regardless of estimation,	      regardless of estimation,
  In them the development good--in them all themes, hints, possibilities.	  In them the development good--in them all themes, hints, possibilities.	  In them the development good--in them all themes, hints, possibilities.	  In them the development good--in them all themes, hints, possibilities.
			
  I do not affirm that what you see beyond is futile, I do not advise	  I do not affirm that what you see beyond is futile, I do not advise	  I do not affirm that what you see beyond is futile, I do not advise	  I do not affirm that what you see beyond is futile, I do not advise
      you to stop,	      you to stop,	      you to stop,	      you to stop,
  I do not say leadings you thought great are not great,	  I do not say leadings you thought great are not great,	  I do not say leadings you thought great are not great,	  I do not say leadings you thought great are not great,
  But I say that none lead to greater than these lead to.	  But I say that none lead to greater than these lead to.	  But I say that none lead to greater than these lead to.	  But I say that none lead to greater than these lead to.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Will you seek afar off? you surely come back at last,	  Will you seek afar off? you surely come back at last,	  Will you seek afar off? you surely come back at last,	  Will you seek afar off? you surely come back at last,
  In things best known to you finding the best, or as good as the best,	  In things best known to you finding the best, or as good as the best,	  In things best known to you finding the best, or as good as the best,	  In things best known to you finding the best, or as good as the best,
  In folks nearest to you finding the sweetest, strongest, lovingest,	  In folks nearest to you finding the sweetest, strongest, lovingest,	  In folks nearest to you finding the sweetest, strongest, lovingest,	  In folks nearest to you finding the sweetest, strongest, lovingest,
  Happiness, knowledge, not in another place but this place, not for	  Happiness, knowledge, not in another place but this place, not for	  Happiness, knowledge, not in another place but this place, not for	  Happiness, knowledge, not in another place but this place, not for
      another hour but this hour,	      another hour but this hour,	      another hour but this hour,	      another hour but this hour,
  Man in the first you see or touch, always in friend, brother,	  Man in the first you see or touch, always in friend, brother,	  Man in the first you see or touch, always in friend, brother,	  Man in the first you see or touch, always in friend, brother,
      nighest neighbor--woman in mother, sister, wife,	      nighest neighbor--woman in mother, sister, wife,	      nighest neighbor--woman in mother, sister, wife,	      nighest neighbor--woman in mother, sister, wife,
  The popular tastes and employments taking precedence in poems or anywhere,	  The popular tastes and employments taking precedence in poems or anywhere,	  The popular tastes and employments taking precedence in poems or anywhere,	  The popular tastes and employments taking precedence in poems or anywhere,
  You workwomen and workmen of these States having your own divine	  You workwomen and workmen of these States having your own divine	  You workwomen and workmen of these States having your own divine	  You workwomen and workmen of these States having your own divine
      and strong life,	      and strong life,	      and strong life,	      and strong life,
  And all else giving place to men and women like you.	  And all else giving place to men and women like you.	  And all else giving place to men and women like you.	  And all else giving place to men and women like you.
  When the psalm sings instead of the singer,	  When the psalm sings instead of the singer,	  When the psalm sings instead of the singer,	  When the psalm sings instead of the singer,
			
  When the script preaches instead of the preacher,	  When the script preaches instead of the preacher,	  When the script preaches instead of the preacher,	  When the script preaches instead of the preacher,
  When the pulpit descends and goes instead of the carver that carved	  When the pulpit descends and goes instead of the carver that carved	  When the pulpit descends and goes instead of the carver that carved	  When the pulpit descends and goes instead of the carver that carved
      the supporting desk,	      the supporting desk,	      the supporting desk,	      the supporting desk,
  When I can touch the body of books by night or by day, and when they	  When I can touch the body of books by night or by day, and when they	  When I can touch the body of books by night or by day, and when they	  When I can touch the body of books by night or by day, and when they
      touch my body back again,	      touch my body back again,	      touch my body back again,	      touch my body back again,
  When a university course convinces like a slumbering woman and child	  When a university course convinces like a slumbering woman and child	  When a university course convinces like a slumbering woman and child	  When a university course convinces like a slumbering woman and child
      convince,	      convince,	      convince,	      convince,
  When the minted gold in the vault smiles like the night-watchman's daughter,	  When the minted gold in the vault smiles like the night-watchman's daughter,	  When the minted gold in the vault smiles like the night-watchman's daughter,	  When the minted gold in the vault smiles like the night-watchman's daughter,
  When warrantee deeds loafe in chairs opposite and are my friendly	  When warrantee deeds loafe in chairs opposite and are my friendly	  When warrantee deeds loafe in chairs opposite and are my friendly	  When warrantee deeds loafe in chairs opposite and are my friendly
      companions,	      companions,	      companions,	      companions,
  I intend to reach them my hand, and make as much of them as I do	  I intend to reach them my hand, and make as much of them as I do	  I intend to reach them my hand, and make as much of them as I do	  I intend to reach them my hand, and make as much of them as I do
      of men and women like you.	      of men and women like you.	      of men and women like you.	      of men and women like you.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XVI	BOOK XVI	BOOK XVI	BOOK XVI
			
			
A Song of the Rolling Earth	A Song of the Rolling Earth	A Song of the Rolling Earth	A Song of the Rolling Earth
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  A song of the rolling earth, and of words according,	  A song of the rolling earth, and of words according,	  A song of the rolling earth, and of words according,	  A song of the rolling earth, and of words according,
  Were you thinking that those were the words, those upright lines?	  Were you thinking that those were the words, those upright lines?	  Were you thinking that those were the words, those upright lines?	  Were you thinking that those were the words, those upright lines?
      those curves, angles, dots?	      those curves, angles, dots?	      those curves, angles, dots?	      those curves, angles, dots?
  No, those are not the words, the substantial words are in the ground	  No, those are not the words, the substantial words are in the ground	  No, those are not the words, the substantial words are in the ground	  No, those are not the words, the substantial words are in the ground
      and sea,	      and sea,	      and sea,	      and sea,
  They are in the air, they are in you.	  They are in the air, they are in you.	  They are in the air, they are in you.	  They are in the air, they are in you.
			
  Were you thinking that those were the words, those delicious sounds	  Were you thinking that those were the words, those delicious sounds	  Were you thinking that those were the words, those delicious sounds	  Were you thinking that those were the words, those delicious sounds
      out of your friends' mouths?	      out of your friends' mouths?	      out of your friends' mouths?	      out of your friends' mouths?
  No, the real words are more delicious than they.	  No, the real words are more delicious than they.	  No, the real words are more delicious than they.	  No, the real words are more delicious than they.
			
  Human bodies are words, myriads of words,	  Human bodies are words, myriads of words,	  Human bodies are words, myriads of words,	  Human bodies are words, myriads of words,
  (In the best poems re-appears the body, man's or woman's,	  (In the best poems re-appears the body, man's or woman's,	  (In the best poems re-appears the body, man's or woman's,	  (In the best poems re-appears the body, man's or woman's,
      well-shaped, natural, gay,	      well-shaped, natural, gay,	      well-shaped, natural, gay,	      well-shaped, natural, gay,
  Every part able, active, receptive, without shame or the need of shame.)	  Every part able, active, receptive, without shame or the need of shame.)	  Every part able, active, receptive, without shame or the need of shame.)	  Every part able, active, receptive, without shame or the need of shame.)
			
  Air, soil, water, fire--those are words,	  Air, soil, water, fire--those are words,	  Air, soil, water, fire--those are words,	  Air, soil, water, fire--those are words,
  I myself am a word with them--my qualities interpenetrate with	  I myself am a word with them--my qualities interpenetrate with	  I myself am a word with them--my qualities interpenetrate with	  I myself am a word with them--my qualities interpenetrate with
      theirs--my name is nothing to them,	      theirs--my name is nothing to them,	      theirs--my name is nothing to them,	      theirs--my name is nothing to them,
  Though it were told in the three thousand languages, what would	  Though it were told in the three thousand languages, what would	  Though it were told in the three thousand languages, what would	  Though it were told in the three thousand languages, what would
      air, soil, water, fire, know of my name?	      air, soil, water, fire, know of my name?	      air, soil, water, fire, know of my name?	      air, soil, water, fire, know of my name?
			
  A healthy presence, a friendly or commanding gesture, are words,	  A healthy presence, a friendly or commanding gesture, are words,	  A healthy presence, a friendly or commanding gesture, are words,	  A healthy presence, a friendly or commanding gesture, are words,
      sayings, meanings,	      sayings, meanings,	      sayings, meanings,	      sayings, meanings,
  The charms that go with the mere looks of some men and women,	  The charms that go with the mere looks of some men and women,	  The charms that go with the mere looks of some men and women,	  The charms that go with the mere looks of some men and women,
      are sayings and meanings also.	      are sayings and meanings also.	      are sayings and meanings also.	      are sayings and meanings also.
			
  The workmanship of souls is by those inaudible words of the earth,	  The workmanship of souls is by those inaudible words of the earth,	  The workmanship of souls is by those inaudible words of the earth,	  The workmanship of souls is by those inaudible words of the earth,
  The masters know the earth's words and use them more than audible words.	  The masters know the earth's words and use them more than audible words.	  The masters know the earth's words and use them more than audible words.	  The masters know the earth's words and use them more than audible words.
			
  Amelioration is one of the earth's words,	  Amelioration is one of the earth's words,	  Amelioration is one of the earth's words,	  Amelioration is one of the earth's words,
  The earth neither lags nor hastens,	  The earth neither lags nor hastens,	  The earth neither lags nor hastens,	  The earth neither lags nor hastens,
  It has all attributes, growths, effects, latent in itself from the jump,	  It has all attributes, growths, effects, latent in itself from the jump,	  It has all attributes, growths, effects, latent in itself from the jump,	  It has all attributes, growths, effects, latent in itself from the jump,
  It is not half beautiful only, defects and excrescences show just as	  It is not half beautiful only, defects and excrescences show just as	  It is not half beautiful only, defects and excrescences show just as	  It is not half beautiful only, defects and excrescences show just as
      much as perfections show.	      much as perfections show.	      much as perfections show.	      much as perfections show.
			
  The earth does not withhold, it is generous enough,	  The earth does not withhold, it is generous enough,	  The earth does not withhold, it is generous enough,	  The earth does not withhold, it is generous enough,
  The truths of the earth continually wait, they are not so conceal'd either,	  The truths of the earth continually wait, they are not so conceal'd either,	  The truths of the earth continually wait, they are not so conceal'd either,	  The truths of the earth continually wait, they are not so conceal'd either,
  They are calm, subtle, untransmissible by print,	  They are calm, subtle, untransmissible by print,	  They are calm, subtle, untransmissible by print,	  They are calm, subtle, untransmissible by print,
  They are imbued through all things conveying themselves willingly,	  They are imbued through all things conveying themselves willingly,	  They are imbued through all things conveying themselves willingly,	  They are imbued through all things conveying themselves willingly,
  Conveying a sentiment and invitation, I utter and utter,	  Conveying a sentiment and invitation, I utter and utter,	  Conveying a sentiment and invitation, I utter and utter,	  Conveying a sentiment and invitation, I utter and utter,
  I speak not, yet if you hear me not of what avail am I to you?	  I speak not, yet if you hear me not of what avail am I to you?	  I speak not, yet if you hear me not of what avail am I to you?	  I speak not, yet if you hear me not of what avail am I to you?
  To bear, to better, lacking these of what avail am I?	  To bear, to better, lacking these of what avail am I?	  To bear, to better, lacking these of what avail am I?	  To bear, to better, lacking these of what avail am I?
			
  (Accouche! accouchez!	  (Accouche! accouchez!	  (Accouche! accouchez!	  (Accouche! accouchez!
  Will you rot your own fruit in yourself there?	  Will you rot your own fruit in yourself there?	  Will you rot your own fruit in yourself there?	  Will you rot your own fruit in yourself there?
  Will you squat and stifle there?)	  Will you squat and stifle there?)	  Will you squat and stifle there?)	  Will you squat and stifle there?)
			
  The earth does not argue,	  The earth does not argue,	  The earth does not argue,	  The earth does not argue,
  Is not pathetic, has no arrangements,	  Is not pathetic, has no arrangements,	  Is not pathetic, has no arrangements,	  Is not pathetic, has no arrangements,
  Does not scream, haste, persuade, threaten, promise,	  Does not scream, haste, persuade, threaten, promise,	  Does not scream, haste, persuade, threaten, promise,	  Does not scream, haste, persuade, threaten, promise,
  Makes no discriminations, has no conceivable failures,	  Makes no discriminations, has no conceivable failures,	  Makes no discriminations, has no conceivable failures,	  Makes no discriminations, has no conceivable failures,
  Closes nothing, refuses nothing, shuts none out,	  Closes nothing, refuses nothing, shuts none out,	  Closes nothing, refuses nothing, shuts none out,	  Closes nothing, refuses nothing, shuts none out,
  Of all the powers, objects, states, it notifies, shuts none out.	  Of all the powers, objects, states, it notifies, shuts none out.	  Of all the powers, objects, states, it notifies, shuts none out.	  Of all the powers, objects, states, it notifies, shuts none out.
			
  The earth does not exhibit itself nor refuse to exhibit itself,	  The earth does not exhibit itself nor refuse to exhibit itself,	  The earth does not exhibit itself nor refuse to exhibit itself,	  The earth does not exhibit itself nor refuse to exhibit itself,
      possesses still underneath,	      possesses still underneath,	      possesses still underneath,	      possesses still underneath,
  Underneath the ostensible sounds, the august chorus of heroes, the	  Underneath the ostensible sounds, the august chorus of heroes, the	  Underneath the ostensible sounds, the august chorus of heroes, the	  Underneath the ostensible sounds, the august chorus of heroes, the
      wail of slaves,	      wail of slaves,	      wail of slaves,	      wail of slaves,
  Persuasions of lovers, curses, gasps of the dying, laughter of young	  Persuasions of lovers, curses, gasps of the dying, laughter of young	  Persuasions of lovers, curses, gasps of the dying, laughter of young	  Persuasions of lovers, curses, gasps of the dying, laughter of young
      people, accents of bargainers,	      people, accents of bargainers,	      people, accents of bargainers,	      people, accents of bargainers,
  Underneath these possessing words that never fall.	  Underneath these possessing words that never fall.	  Underneath these possessing words that never fall.	  Underneath these possessing words that never fall.
			
  To her children the words of the eloquent dumb great mother never fail,	  To her children the words of the eloquent dumb great mother never fail,	  To her children the words of the eloquent dumb great mother never fail,	  To her children the words of the eloquent dumb great mother never fail,
  The true words do not fail, for motion does not fail and reflection	  The true words do not fail, for motion does not fail and reflection	  The true words do not fail, for motion does not fail and reflection	  The true words do not fail, for motion does not fail and reflection
      does not fall,	      does not fall,	      does not fall,	      does not fall,
  Also the day and night do not fall, and the voyage we pursue does not fall.	  Also the day and night do not fall, and the voyage we pursue does not fall.	  Also the day and night do not fall, and the voyage we pursue does not fall.	  Also the day and night do not fall, and the voyage we pursue does not fall.
			
  Of the interminable sisters,	  Of the interminable sisters,	  Of the interminable sisters,	  Of the interminable sisters,
  Of the ceaseless cotillons of sisters,	  Of the ceaseless cotillons of sisters,	  Of the ceaseless cotillons of sisters,	  Of the ceaseless cotillons of sisters,
  Of the centripetal and centrifugal sisters, the elder and younger sisters,	  Of the centripetal and centrifugal sisters, the elder and younger sisters,	  Of the centripetal and centrifugal sisters, the elder and younger sisters,	  Of the centripetal and centrifugal sisters, the elder and younger sisters,
  The beautiful sister we know dances on with the rest.	  The beautiful sister we know dances on with the rest.	  The beautiful sister we know dances on with the rest.	  The beautiful sister we know dances on with the rest.
			
  With her ample back towards every beholder,	  With her ample back towards every beholder,	  With her ample back towards every beholder,	  With her ample back towards every beholder,
  With the fascinations of youth and the equal fascinations of age,	  With the fascinations of youth and the equal fascinations of age,	  With the fascinations of youth and the equal fascinations of age,	  With the fascinations of youth and the equal fascinations of age,
  Sits she whom I too love like the rest, sits undisturb'd,	  Sits she whom I too love like the rest, sits undisturb'd,	  Sits she whom I too love like the rest, sits undisturb'd,	  Sits she whom I too love like the rest, sits undisturb'd,
  Holding up in her hand what has the character of a mirror, while her	  Holding up in her hand what has the character of a mirror, while her	  Holding up in her hand what has the character of a mirror, while her	  Holding up in her hand what has the character of a mirror, while her
      eyes glance back from it,	      eyes glance back from it,	      eyes glance back from it,	      eyes glance back from it,
  Glance as she sits, inviting none, denying none,	  Glance as she sits, inviting none, denying none,	  Glance as she sits, inviting none, denying none,	  Glance as she sits, inviting none, denying none,
  Holding a mirror day and night tirelessly before her own face.	  Holding a mirror day and night tirelessly before her own face.	  Holding a mirror day and night tirelessly before her own face.	  Holding a mirror day and night tirelessly before her own face.
			
  Seen at hand or seen at a distance,	  Seen at hand or seen at a distance,	  Seen at hand or seen at a distance,	  Seen at hand or seen at a distance,
  Duly the twenty-four appear in public every day,	  Duly the twenty-four appear in public every day,	  Duly the twenty-four appear in public every day,	  Duly the twenty-four appear in public every day,
  Duly approach and pass with their companions or a companion,	  Duly approach and pass with their companions or a companion,	  Duly approach and pass with their companions or a companion,	  Duly approach and pass with their companions or a companion,
  Looking from no countenances of their own, but from the countenances	  Looking from no countenances of their own, but from the countenances	  Looking from no countenances of their own, but from the countenances	  Looking from no countenances of their own, but from the countenances
      of those who are with them,	      of those who are with them,	      of those who are with them,	      of those who are with them,
  From the countenances of children or women or the manly countenance,	  From the countenances of children or women or the manly countenance,	  From the countenances of children or women or the manly countenance,	  From the countenances of children or women or the manly countenance,
  From the open countenances of animals or from inanimate things,	  From the open countenances of animals or from inanimate things,	  From the open countenances of animals or from inanimate things,	  From the open countenances of animals or from inanimate things,
  From the landscape or waters or from the exquisite apparition of the sky,	  From the landscape or waters or from the exquisite apparition of the sky,	  From the landscape or waters or from the exquisite apparition of the sky,	  From the landscape or waters or from the exquisite apparition of the sky,
  From our countenances, mine and yours, faithfully returning them,	  From our countenances, mine and yours, faithfully returning them,	  From our countenances, mine and yours, faithfully returning them,	  From our countenances, mine and yours, faithfully returning them,
  Every day in public appearing without fall, but never twice with the	  Every day in public appearing without fall, but never twice with the	  Every day in public appearing without fall, but never twice with the	  Every day in public appearing without fall, but never twice with the
      same companions.	      same companions.	      same companions.	      same companions.
			
  Embracing man, embracing all, proceed the three hundred and	  Embracing man, embracing all, proceed the three hundred and	  Embracing man, embracing all, proceed the three hundred and	  Embracing man, embracing all, proceed the three hundred and
      sixty-five resistlessly round the sun;	      sixty-five resistlessly round the sun;	      sixty-five resistlessly round the sun;	      sixty-five resistlessly round the sun;
  Embracing all, soothing, supporting, follow close three hundred and	  Embracing all, soothing, supporting, follow close three hundred and	  Embracing all, soothing, supporting, follow close three hundred and	  Embracing all, soothing, supporting, follow close three hundred and
      sixty-five offsets of the first, sure and necessary as they.	      sixty-five offsets of the first, sure and necessary as they.	      sixty-five offsets of the first, sure and necessary as they.	      sixty-five offsets of the first, sure and necessary as they.
			
  Tumbling on steadily, nothing dreading,	  Tumbling on steadily, nothing dreading,	  Tumbling on steadily, nothing dreading,	  Tumbling on steadily, nothing dreading,
  Sunshine, storm, cold, heat, forever withstanding, passing, carrying,	  Sunshine, storm, cold, heat, forever withstanding, passing, carrying,	  Sunshine, storm, cold, heat, forever withstanding, passing, carrying,	  Sunshine, storm, cold, heat, forever withstanding, passing, carrying,
  The soul's realization and determination still inheriting,	  The soul's realization and determination still inheriting,	  The soul's realization and determination still inheriting,	  The soul's realization and determination still inheriting,
  The fluid vacuum around and ahead still entering and dividing,	  The fluid vacuum around and ahead still entering and dividing,	  The fluid vacuum around and ahead still entering and dividing,	  The fluid vacuum around and ahead still entering and dividing,
  No balk retarding, no anchor anchoring, on no rock striking,	  No balk retarding, no anchor anchoring, on no rock striking,	  No balk retarding, no anchor anchoring, on no rock striking,	  No balk retarding, no anchor anchoring, on no rock striking,
  Swift, glad, content, unbereav'd, nothing losing,	  Swift, glad, content, unbereav'd, nothing losing,	  Swift, glad, content, unbereav'd, nothing losing,	  Swift, glad, content, unbereav'd, nothing losing,
  Of all able and ready at any time to give strict account,	  Of all able and ready at any time to give strict account,	  Of all able and ready at any time to give strict account,	  Of all able and ready at any time to give strict account,
  The divine ship sails the divine sea.	  The divine ship sails the divine sea.	  The divine ship sails the divine sea.	  The divine ship sails the divine sea.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Whoever you are! motion and reflection are especially for you,	  Whoever you are! motion and reflection are especially for you,	  Whoever you are! motion and reflection are especially for you,	  Whoever you are! motion and reflection are especially for you,
  The divine ship sails the divine sea for you.	  The divine ship sails the divine sea for you.	  The divine ship sails the divine sea for you.	  The divine ship sails the divine sea for you.
			
  Whoever you are! you are he or she for whom the earth is solid and liquid,	  Whoever you are! you are he or she for whom the earth is solid and liquid,	  Whoever you are! you are he or she for whom the earth is solid and liquid,	  Whoever you are! you are he or she for whom the earth is solid and liquid,
  You are he or she for whom the sun and moon hang in the sky,	  You are he or she for whom the sun and moon hang in the sky,	  You are he or she for whom the sun and moon hang in the sky,	  You are he or she for whom the sun and moon hang in the sky,
  For none more than you are the present and the past,	  For none more than you are the present and the past,	  For none more than you are the present and the past,	  For none more than you are the present and the past,
  For none more than you is immortality.	  For none more than you is immortality.	  For none more than you is immortality.	  For none more than you is immortality.
			
  Each man to himself and each woman to herself, is the word of the	  Each man to himself and each woman to herself, is the word of the	  Each man to himself and each woman to herself, is the word of the	  Each man to himself and each woman to herself, is the word of the
      past and present, and the true word of immortality;	      past and present, and the true word of immortality;	      past and present, and the true word of immortality;	      past and present, and the true word of immortality;
  No one can acquire for another--not one,	  No one can acquire for another--not one,	  No one can acquire for another--not one,	  No one can acquire for another--not one,
  Not one can grow for another--not one.	  Not one can grow for another--not one.	  Not one can grow for another--not one.	  Not one can grow for another--not one.
			
  The song is to the singer, and comes back most to him,	  The song is to the singer, and comes back most to him,	  The song is to the singer, and comes back most to him,	  The song is to the singer, and comes back most to him,
  The teaching is to the teacher, and comes back most to him,	  The teaching is to the teacher, and comes back most to him,	  The teaching is to the teacher, and comes back most to him,	  The teaching is to the teacher, and comes back most to him,
  The murder is to the murderer, and comes back most to him,	  The murder is to the murderer, and comes back most to him,	  The murder is to the murderer, and comes back most to him,	  The murder is to the murderer, and comes back most to him,
  The theft is to the thief, and comes back most to him,	  The theft is to the thief, and comes back most to him,	  The theft is to the thief, and comes back most to him,	  The theft is to the thief, and comes back most to him,
  The love is to the lover, and comes back most to him,	  The love is to the lover, and comes back most to him,	  The love is to the lover, and comes back most to him,	  The love is to the lover, and comes back most to him,
  The gift is to the giver, and comes back most to him--it cannot fail,	  The gift is to the giver, and comes back most to him--it cannot fail,	  The gift is to the giver, and comes back most to him--it cannot fail,	  The gift is to the giver, and comes back most to him--it cannot fail,
  The oration is to the orator, the acting is to the actor and actress	  The oration is to the orator, the acting is to the actor and actress	  The oration is to the orator, the acting is to the actor and actress	  The oration is to the orator, the acting is to the actor and actress
      not to the audience,	      not to the audience,	      not to the audience,	      not to the audience,
  And no man understands any greatness or goodness but his own, or	  And no man understands any greatness or goodness but his own, or	  And no man understands any greatness or goodness but his own, or	  And no man understands any greatness or goodness but his own, or
      the indication of his own.	      the indication of his own.	      the indication of his own.	      the indication of his own.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  I swear the earth shall surely be complete to him or her who shall	  I swear the earth shall surely be complete to him or her who shall	  I swear the earth shall surely be complete to him or her who shall	  I swear the earth shall surely be complete to him or her who shall
      be complete,	      be complete,	      be complete,	      be complete,
  The earth remains jagged and broken only to him or her who remains	  The earth remains jagged and broken only to him or her who remains	  The earth remains jagged and broken only to him or her who remains	  The earth remains jagged and broken only to him or her who remains
      jagged and broken.	      jagged and broken.	      jagged and broken.	      jagged and broken.
			
  I swear there is no greatness or power that does not emulate those	  I swear there is no greatness or power that does not emulate those	  I swear there is no greatness or power that does not emulate those	  I swear there is no greatness or power that does not emulate those
      of the earth,	      of the earth,	      of the earth,	      of the earth,
  There can be no theory of any account unless it corroborate the	  There can be no theory of any account unless it corroborate the	  There can be no theory of any account unless it corroborate the	  There can be no theory of any account unless it corroborate the
      theory of the earth,	      theory of the earth,	      theory of the earth,	      theory of the earth,
  No politics, song, religion, behavior, or what not, is of account,	  No politics, song, religion, behavior, or what not, is of account,	  No politics, song, religion, behavior, or what not, is of account,	  No politics, song, religion, behavior, or what not, is of account,
      unless it compare with the amplitude of the earth,	      unless it compare with the amplitude of the earth,	      unless it compare with the amplitude of the earth,	      unless it compare with the amplitude of the earth,
  Unless it face the exactness, vitality, impartiality, rectitude of	  Unless it face the exactness, vitality, impartiality, rectitude of	  Unless it face the exactness, vitality, impartiality, rectitude of	  Unless it face the exactness, vitality, impartiality, rectitude of
      the earth.	      the earth.	      the earth.	      the earth.
			
  I swear I begin to see love with sweeter spasms than that which	  I swear I begin to see love with sweeter spasms than that which	  I swear I begin to see love with sweeter spasms than that which	  I swear I begin to see love with sweeter spasms than that which
      responds love,	      responds love,	      responds love,	      responds love,
  It is that which contains itself, which never invites and never refuses.	  It is that which contains itself, which never invites and never refuses.	  It is that which contains itself, which never invites and never refuses.	  It is that which contains itself, which never invites and never refuses.
			
  I swear I begin to see little or nothing in audible words,	  I swear I begin to see little or nothing in audible words,	  I swear I begin to see little or nothing in audible words,	  I swear I begin to see little or nothing in audible words,
  All merges toward the presentation of the unspoken meanings of the earth,	  All merges toward the presentation of the unspoken meanings of the earth,	  All merges toward the presentation of the unspoken meanings of the earth,	  All merges toward the presentation of the unspoken meanings of the earth,
  Toward him who sings the songs of the body and of the truths of the earth,	  Toward him who sings the songs of the body and of the truths of the earth,	  Toward him who sings the songs of the body and of the truths of the earth,	  Toward him who sings the songs of the body and of the truths of the earth,
  Toward him who makes the dictionaries of words that print cannot touch.	  Toward him who makes the dictionaries of words that print cannot touch.	  Toward him who makes the dictionaries of words that print cannot touch.	  Toward him who makes the dictionaries of words that print cannot touch.
			
  I swear I see what is better than to tell the best,	  I swear I see what is better than to tell the best,	  I swear I see what is better than to tell the best,	  I swear I see what is better than to tell the best,
  It is always to leave the best untold.	  It is always to leave the best untold.	  It is always to leave the best untold.	  It is always to leave the best untold.
			
  When I undertake to tell the best I find I cannot,	  When I undertake to tell the best I find I cannot,	  When I undertake to tell the best I find I cannot,	  When I undertake to tell the best I find I cannot,
  My tongue is ineffectual on its pivots,	  My tongue is ineffectual on its pivots,	  My tongue is ineffectual on its pivots,	  My tongue is ineffectual on its pivots,
  My breath will not be obedient to its organs,	  My breath will not be obedient to its organs,	  My breath will not be obedient to its organs,	  My breath will not be obedient to its organs,
  I become a dumb man.	  I become a dumb man.	  I become a dumb man.	  I become a dumb man.
			
  The best of the earth cannot be told anyhow, all or any is best,	  The best of the earth cannot be told anyhow, all or any is best,	  The best of the earth cannot be told anyhow, all or any is best,	  The best of the earth cannot be told anyhow, all or any is best,
  It is not what you anticipated, it is cheaper, easier, nearer,	  It is not what you anticipated, it is cheaper, easier, nearer,	  It is not what you anticipated, it is cheaper, easier, nearer,	  It is not what you anticipated, it is cheaper, easier, nearer,
  Things are not dismiss'd from the places they held before,	  Things are not dismiss'd from the places they held before,	  Things are not dismiss'd from the places they held before,	  Things are not dismiss'd from the places they held before,
  The earth is just as positive and direct as it was before,	  The earth is just as positive and direct as it was before,	  The earth is just as positive and direct as it was before,	  The earth is just as positive and direct as it was before,
  Facts, religions, improvements, politics, trades, are as real as before,	  Facts, religions, improvements, politics, trades, are as real as before,	  Facts, religions, improvements, politics, trades, are as real as before,	  Facts, religions, improvements, politics, trades, are as real as before,
  But the soul is also real, it too is positive and direct,	  But the soul is also real, it too is positive and direct,	  But the soul is also real, it too is positive and direct,	  But the soul is also real, it too is positive and direct,
  No reasoning, no proof has establish'd it,	  No reasoning, no proof has establish'd it,	  No reasoning, no proof has establish'd it,	  No reasoning, no proof has establish'd it,
  Undeniable growth has establish'd it.	  Undeniable growth has establish'd it.	  Undeniable growth has establish'd it.	  Undeniable growth has establish'd it.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  These to echo the tones of souls and the phrases of souls,	  These to echo the tones of souls and the phrases of souls,	  These to echo the tones of souls and the phrases of souls,	  These to echo the tones of souls and the phrases of souls,
  (If they did not echo the phrases of souls what were they then?	  (If they did not echo the phrases of souls what were they then?	  (If they did not echo the phrases of souls what were they then?	  (If they did not echo the phrases of souls what were they then?
  If they had not reference to you in especial what were they then?)	  If they had not reference to you in especial what were they then?)	  If they had not reference to you in especial what were they then?)	  If they had not reference to you in especial what were they then?)
			
  I swear I will never henceforth have to do with the faith that tells	  I swear I will never henceforth have to do with the faith that tells	  I swear I will never henceforth have to do with the faith that tells	  I swear I will never henceforth have to do with the faith that tells
      the best,	      the best,	      the best,	      the best,
  I will have to do only with that faith that leaves the best untold.	  I will have to do only with that faith that leaves the best untold.	  I will have to do only with that faith that leaves the best untold.	  I will have to do only with that faith that leaves the best untold.
			
  Say on, sayers! sing on, singers!	  Say on, sayers! sing on, singers!	  Say on, sayers! sing on, singers!	  Say on, sayers! sing on, singers!
  Delve! mould! pile the words of the earth!	  Delve! mould! pile the words of the earth!	  Delve! mould! pile the words of the earth!	  Delve! mould! pile the words of the earth!
  Work on, age after age, nothing is to be lost,	  Work on, age after age, nothing is to be lost,	  Work on, age after age, nothing is to be lost,	  Work on, age after age, nothing is to be lost,
  It may have to wait long, but it will certainly come in use,	  It may have to wait long, but it will certainly come in use,	  It may have to wait long, but it will certainly come in use,	  It may have to wait long, but it will certainly come in use,
  When the materials are all prepared and ready, the architects shall appear.	  When the materials are all prepared and ready, the architects shall appear.	  When the materials are all prepared and ready, the architects shall appear.	  When the materials are all prepared and ready, the architects shall appear.
			
  I swear to you the architects shall appear without fall,	  I swear to you the architects shall appear without fall,	  I swear to you the architects shall appear without fall,	  I swear to you the architects shall appear without fall,
  I swear to you they will understand you and justify you,	  I swear to you they will understand you and justify you,	  I swear to you they will understand you and justify you,	  I swear to you they will understand you and justify you,
  The greatest among them shall be he who best knows you, and encloses	  The greatest among them shall be he who best knows you, and encloses	  The greatest among them shall be he who best knows you, and encloses	  The greatest among them shall be he who best knows you, and encloses
      all and is faithful to all,	      all and is faithful to all,	      all and is faithful to all,	      all and is faithful to all,
  He and the rest shall not forget you, they shall perceive that you	  He and the rest shall not forget you, they shall perceive that you	  He and the rest shall not forget you, they shall perceive that you	  He and the rest shall not forget you, they shall perceive that you
      are not an iota less than they,	      are not an iota less than they,	      are not an iota less than they,	      are not an iota less than they,
  You shall be fully glorified in them.	  You shall be fully glorified in them.	  You shall be fully glorified in them.	  You shall be fully glorified in them.
			
			
			
			
Youth, Day, Old Age and Night	Youth, Day, Old Age and Night	Youth, Day, Old Age and Night	Youth, Day, Old Age and Night
			
  Youth, large, lusty, loving--youth full of grace, force, fascination,	  Youth, large, lusty, loving--youth full of grace, force, fascination,	  Youth, large, lusty, loving--youth full of grace, force, fascination,	  Youth, large, lusty, loving--youth full of grace, force, fascination,
  Do you know that Old Age may come after you with equal grace,	  Do you know that Old Age may come after you with equal grace,	  Do you know that Old Age may come after you with equal grace,	  Do you know that Old Age may come after you with equal grace,
      force, fascination?	      force, fascination?	      force, fascination?	      force, fascination?
			
  Day full-blown and splendid-day of the immense sun, action,	  Day full-blown and splendid-day of the immense sun, action,	  Day full-blown and splendid-day of the immense sun, action,	  Day full-blown and splendid-day of the immense sun, action,
      ambition, laughter,	      ambition, laughter,	      ambition, laughter,	      ambition, laughter,
  The Night follows close with millions of suns, and sleep and	  The Night follows close with millions of suns, and sleep and	  The Night follows close with millions of suns, and sleep and	  The Night follows close with millions of suns, and sleep and
      restoring darkness.	      restoring darkness.	      restoring darkness.	      restoring darkness.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XVII.  BIRDS OF PASSAGE	BOOK XVII.  BIRDS OF PASSAGE	BOOK XVII.  BIRDS OF PASSAGE	BOOK XVII.  BIRDS OF PASSAGE
			
			
Song of the Universal	Song of the Universal	Song of the Universal	Song of the Universal
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Come said the Muse,	  Come said the Muse,	  Come said the Muse,	  Come said the Muse,
  Sing me a song no poet yet has chanted,	  Sing me a song no poet yet has chanted,	  Sing me a song no poet yet has chanted,	  Sing me a song no poet yet has chanted,
  Sing me the universal.	  Sing me the universal.	  Sing me the universal.	  Sing me the universal.
			
  In this broad earth of ours,	  In this broad earth of ours,	  In this broad earth of ours,	  In this broad earth of ours,
  Amid the measureless grossness and the slag,	  Amid the measureless grossness and the slag,	  Amid the measureless grossness and the slag,	  Amid the measureless grossness and the slag,
  Enclosed and safe within its central heart,	  Enclosed and safe within its central heart,	  Enclosed and safe within its central heart,	  Enclosed and safe within its central heart,
  Nestles the seed perfection.	  Nestles the seed perfection.	  Nestles the seed perfection.	  Nestles the seed perfection.
			
  By every life a share or more or less,	  By every life a share or more or less,	  By every life a share or more or less,	  By every life a share or more or less,
  None born but it is born, conceal'd or unconceal'd the seed is waiting.	  None born but it is born, conceal'd or unconceal'd the seed is waiting.	  None born but it is born, conceal'd or unconceal'd the seed is waiting.	  None born but it is born, conceal'd or unconceal'd the seed is waiting.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Lo! keen-eyed towering science,	  Lo! keen-eyed towering science,	  Lo! keen-eyed towering science,	  Lo! keen-eyed towering science,
  As from tall peaks the modern overlooking,	  As from tall peaks the modern overlooking,	  As from tall peaks the modern overlooking,	  As from tall peaks the modern overlooking,
  Successive absolute fiats issuing.	  Successive absolute fiats issuing.	  Successive absolute fiats issuing.	  Successive absolute fiats issuing.
			
  Yet again, lo! the soul, above all science,	  Yet again, lo! the soul, above all science,	  Yet again, lo! the soul, above all science,	  Yet again, lo! the soul, above all science,
  For it has history gather'd like husks around the globe,	  For it has history gather'd like husks around the globe,	  For it has history gather'd like husks around the globe,	  For it has history gather'd like husks around the globe,
  For it the entire star-myriads roll through the sky.	  For it the entire star-myriads roll through the sky.	  For it the entire star-myriads roll through the sky.	  For it the entire star-myriads roll through the sky.
			
  In spiral routes by long detours,	  In spiral routes by long detours,	  In spiral routes by long detours,	  In spiral routes by long detours,
  (As a much-tacking ship upon the sea,)	  (As a much-tacking ship upon the sea,)	  (As a much-tacking ship upon the sea,)	  (As a much-tacking ship upon the sea,)
  For it the partial to the permanent flowing,	  For it the partial to the permanent flowing,	  For it the partial to the permanent flowing,	  For it the partial to the permanent flowing,
  For it the real to the ideal tends.	  For it the real to the ideal tends.	  For it the real to the ideal tends.	  For it the real to the ideal tends.
			
  For it the mystic evolution,	  For it the mystic evolution,	  For it the mystic evolution,	  For it the mystic evolution,
  Not the right only justified, what we call evil also justified.	  Not the right only justified, what we call evil also justified.	  Not the right only justified, what we call evil also justified.	  Not the right only justified, what we call evil also justified.
			
  Forth from their masks, no matter what,	  Forth from their masks, no matter what,	  Forth from their masks, no matter what,	  Forth from their masks, no matter what,
  From the huge festering trunk, from craft and guile and tears,	  From the huge festering trunk, from craft and guile and tears,	  From the huge festering trunk, from craft and guile and tears,	  From the huge festering trunk, from craft and guile and tears,
  Health to emerge and joy, joy universal.	  Health to emerge and joy, joy universal.	  Health to emerge and joy, joy universal.	  Health to emerge and joy, joy universal.
			
  Out of the bulk, the morbid and the shallow,	  Out of the bulk, the morbid and the shallow,	  Out of the bulk, the morbid and the shallow,	  Out of the bulk, the morbid and the shallow,
  Out of the bad majority, the varied countless frauds of men and states,	  Out of the bad majority, the varied countless frauds of men and states,	  Out of the bad majority, the varied countless frauds of men and states,	  Out of the bad majority, the varied countless frauds of men and states,
  Electric, antiseptic yet, cleaving, suffusing all,	  Electric, antiseptic yet, cleaving, suffusing all,	  Electric, antiseptic yet, cleaving, suffusing all,	  Electric, antiseptic yet, cleaving, suffusing all,
  Only the good is universal.	  Only the good is universal.	  Only the good is universal.	  Only the good is universal.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Over the mountain-growths disease and sorrow,	  Over the mountain-growths disease and sorrow,	  Over the mountain-growths disease and sorrow,	  Over the mountain-growths disease and sorrow,
  An uncaught bird is ever hovering, hovering,	  An uncaught bird is ever hovering, hovering,	  An uncaught bird is ever hovering, hovering,	  An uncaught bird is ever hovering, hovering,
  High in the purer, happier air.	  High in the purer, happier air.	  High in the purer, happier air.	  High in the purer, happier air.
			
  From imperfection's murkiest cloud,	  From imperfection's murkiest cloud,	  From imperfection's murkiest cloud,	  From imperfection's murkiest cloud,
  Darts always forth one ray of perfect light,	  Darts always forth one ray of perfect light,	  Darts always forth one ray of perfect light,	  Darts always forth one ray of perfect light,
  One flash of heaven's glory.	  One flash of heaven's glory.	  One flash of heaven's glory.	  One flash of heaven's glory.
			
  To fashion's, custom's discord,	  To fashion's, custom's discord,	  To fashion's, custom's discord,	  To fashion's, custom's discord,
  To the mad Babel-din, the deafening orgies,	  To the mad Babel-din, the deafening orgies,	  To the mad Babel-din, the deafening orgies,	  To the mad Babel-din, the deafening orgies,
  Soothing each lull a strain is heard, just heard,	  Soothing each lull a strain is heard, just heard,	  Soothing each lull a strain is heard, just heard,	  Soothing each lull a strain is heard, just heard,
  From some far shore the final chorus sounding.	  From some far shore the final chorus sounding.	  From some far shore the final chorus sounding.	  From some far shore the final chorus sounding.
			
  O the blest eyes, the happy hearts,	  O the blest eyes, the happy hearts,	  O the blest eyes, the happy hearts,	  O the blest eyes, the happy hearts,
  That see, that know the guiding thread so fine,	  That see, that know the guiding thread so fine,	  That see, that know the guiding thread so fine,	  That see, that know the guiding thread so fine,
  Along the mighty labyrinth.	  Along the mighty labyrinth.	  Along the mighty labyrinth.	  Along the mighty labyrinth.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  And thou America,	  And thou America,	  And thou America,	  And thou America,
  For the scheme's culmination, its thought and its reality,	  For the scheme's culmination, its thought and its reality,	  For the scheme's culmination, its thought and its reality,	  For the scheme's culmination, its thought and its reality,
  For these (not for thyself) thou hast arrived.	  For these (not for thyself) thou hast arrived.	  For these (not for thyself) thou hast arrived.	  For these (not for thyself) thou hast arrived.
			
  Thou too surroundest all,	  Thou too surroundest all,	  Thou too surroundest all,	  Thou too surroundest all,
  Embracing carrying welcoming all, thou too by pathways broad and new,	  Embracing carrying welcoming all, thou too by pathways broad and new,	  Embracing carrying welcoming all, thou too by pathways broad and new,	  Embracing carrying welcoming all, thou too by pathways broad and new,
  To the ideal tendest.	  To the ideal tendest.	  To the ideal tendest.	  To the ideal tendest.
			
  The measure'd faiths of other lands, the grandeurs of the past,	  The measure'd faiths of other lands, the grandeurs of the past,	  The measure'd faiths of other lands, the grandeurs of the past,	  The measure'd faiths of other lands, the grandeurs of the past,
  Are not for thee, but grandeurs of thine own,	  Are not for thee, but grandeurs of thine own,	  Are not for thee, but grandeurs of thine own,	  Are not for thee, but grandeurs of thine own,
  Deific faiths and amplitudes, absorbing, comprehending all,	  Deific faiths and amplitudes, absorbing, comprehending all,	  Deific faiths and amplitudes, absorbing, comprehending all,	  Deific faiths and amplitudes, absorbing, comprehending all,
  All eligible to all.	  All eligible to all.	  All eligible to all.	  All eligible to all.
			
  All, all for immortality,	  All, all for immortality,	  All, all for immortality,	  All, all for immortality,
  Love like the light silently wrapping all,	  Love like the light silently wrapping all,	  Love like the light silently wrapping all,	  Love like the light silently wrapping all,
  Nature's amelioration blessing all,	  Nature's amelioration blessing all,	  Nature's amelioration blessing all,	  Nature's amelioration blessing all,
  The blossoms, fruits of ages, orchards divine and certain,	  The blossoms, fruits of ages, orchards divine and certain,	  The blossoms, fruits of ages, orchards divine and certain,	  The blossoms, fruits of ages, orchards divine and certain,
  Forms, objects, growths, humanities, to spiritual images ripening.	  Forms, objects, growths, humanities, to spiritual images ripening.	  Forms, objects, growths, humanities, to spiritual images ripening.	  Forms, objects, growths, humanities, to spiritual images ripening.
			
  Give me O God to sing that thought,	  Give me O God to sing that thought,	  Give me O God to sing that thought,	  Give me O God to sing that thought,
  Give me, give him or her I love this quenchless faith,	  Give me, give him or her I love this quenchless faith,	  Give me, give him or her I love this quenchless faith,	  Give me, give him or her I love this quenchless faith,
  In Thy ensemble, whatever else withheld withhold not from us,	  In Thy ensemble, whatever else withheld withhold not from us,	  In Thy ensemble, whatever else withheld withhold not from us,	  In Thy ensemble, whatever else withheld withhold not from us,
  Belief in plan of Thee enclosed in Time and Space,	  Belief in plan of Thee enclosed in Time and Space,	  Belief in plan of Thee enclosed in Time and Space,	  Belief in plan of Thee enclosed in Time and Space,
  Health, peace, salvation universal.	  Health, peace, salvation universal.	  Health, peace, salvation universal.	  Health, peace, salvation universal.
			
  Is it a dream?	  Is it a dream?	  Is it a dream?	  Is it a dream?
  Nay but the lack of it the dream,	  Nay but the lack of it the dream,	  Nay but the lack of it the dream,	  Nay but the lack of it the dream,
  And failing it life's lore and wealth a dream,	  And failing it life's lore and wealth a dream,	  And failing it life's lore and wealth a dream,	  And failing it life's lore and wealth a dream,
  And all the world a dream.	  And all the world a dream.	  And all the world a dream.	  And all the world a dream.
			
			
			
			
Pioneers! O Pioneers!	Pioneers! O Pioneers!	Pioneers! O Pioneers!	Pioneers! O Pioneers!
			
       Come my tan-faced children,	       Come my tan-faced children,	       Come my tan-faced children,	       Come my tan-faced children,
  Follow well in order, get your weapons ready,	  Follow well in order, get your weapons ready,	  Follow well in order, get your weapons ready,	  Follow well in order, get your weapons ready,
  Have you your pistols? have you your sharp-edged axes?	  Have you your pistols? have you your sharp-edged axes?	  Have you your pistols? have you your sharp-edged axes?	  Have you your pistols? have you your sharp-edged axes?
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       For we cannot tarry here,	       For we cannot tarry here,	       For we cannot tarry here,	       For we cannot tarry here,
  We must march my darlings, we must bear the brunt of danger,	  We must march my darlings, we must bear the brunt of danger,	  We must march my darlings, we must bear the brunt of danger,	  We must march my darlings, we must bear the brunt of danger,
  We the youthful sinewy races, all the rest on us depend,	  We the youthful sinewy races, all the rest on us depend,	  We the youthful sinewy races, all the rest on us depend,	  We the youthful sinewy races, all the rest on us depend,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       O you youths, Western youths,	       O you youths, Western youths,	       O you youths, Western youths,	       O you youths, Western youths,
  So impatient, full of action, full of manly pride and friendship,	  So impatient, full of action, full of manly pride and friendship,	  So impatient, full of action, full of manly pride and friendship,	  So impatient, full of action, full of manly pride and friendship,
  Plain I see you Western youths, see you tramping with the foremost,	  Plain I see you Western youths, see you tramping with the foremost,	  Plain I see you Western youths, see you tramping with the foremost,	  Plain I see you Western youths, see you tramping with the foremost,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Have the elder races halted?	       Have the elder races halted?	       Have the elder races halted?	       Have the elder races halted?
  Do they droop and end their lesson, wearied over there beyond the seas?	  Do they droop and end their lesson, wearied over there beyond the seas?	  Do they droop and end their lesson, wearied over there beyond the seas?	  Do they droop and end their lesson, wearied over there beyond the seas?
  We take up the task eternal, and the burden and the lesson,	  We take up the task eternal, and the burden and the lesson,	  We take up the task eternal, and the burden and the lesson,	  We take up the task eternal, and the burden and the lesson,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       All the past we leave behind,	       All the past we leave behind,	       All the past we leave behind,	       All the past we leave behind,
  We debouch upon a newer mightier world, varied world,	  We debouch upon a newer mightier world, varied world,	  We debouch upon a newer mightier world, varied world,	  We debouch upon a newer mightier world, varied world,
  Fresh and strong the world we seize, world of labor and the march,	  Fresh and strong the world we seize, world of labor and the march,	  Fresh and strong the world we seize, world of labor and the march,	  Fresh and strong the world we seize, world of labor and the march,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       We detachments steady throwing,	       We detachments steady throwing,	       We detachments steady throwing,	       We detachments steady throwing,
  Down the edges, through the passes, up the mountains steep,	  Down the edges, through the passes, up the mountains steep,	  Down the edges, through the passes, up the mountains steep,	  Down the edges, through the passes, up the mountains steep,
  Conquering, holding, daring, venturing as we go the unknown ways,	  Conquering, holding, daring, venturing as we go the unknown ways,	  Conquering, holding, daring, venturing as we go the unknown ways,	  Conquering, holding, daring, venturing as we go the unknown ways,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       We primeval forests felling,	       We primeval forests felling,	       We primeval forests felling,	       We primeval forests felling,
  We the rivers stemming, vexing we and piercing deep the mines within,	  We the rivers stemming, vexing we and piercing deep the mines within,	  We the rivers stemming, vexing we and piercing deep the mines within,	  We the rivers stemming, vexing we and piercing deep the mines within,
  We the surface broad surveying, we the virgin soil upheaving,	  We the surface broad surveying, we the virgin soil upheaving,	  We the surface broad surveying, we the virgin soil upheaving,	  We the surface broad surveying, we the virgin soil upheaving,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Colorado men are we,	       Colorado men are we,	       Colorado men are we,	       Colorado men are we,
  From the peaks gigantic, from the great sierras and the high plateaus,	  From the peaks gigantic, from the great sierras and the high plateaus,	  From the peaks gigantic, from the great sierras and the high plateaus,	  From the peaks gigantic, from the great sierras and the high plateaus,
  From the mine and from the gully, from the hunting trail we come,	  From the mine and from the gully, from the hunting trail we come,	  From the mine and from the gully, from the hunting trail we come,	  From the mine and from the gully, from the hunting trail we come,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       From Nebraska, from Arkansas,	       From Nebraska, from Arkansas,	       From Nebraska, from Arkansas,	       From Nebraska, from Arkansas,
  Central inland race are we, from Missouri, with the continental	  Central inland race are we, from Missouri, with the continental	  Central inland race are we, from Missouri, with the continental	  Central inland race are we, from Missouri, with the continental
       blood intervein'd,	       blood intervein'd,	       blood intervein'd,	       blood intervein'd,
  All the hands of comrades clasping, all the Southern, all the Northern,	  All the hands of comrades clasping, all the Southern, all the Northern,	  All the hands of comrades clasping, all the Southern, all the Northern,	  All the hands of comrades clasping, all the Southern, all the Northern,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       O resistless restless race!	       O resistless restless race!	       O resistless restless race!	       O resistless restless race!
  O beloved race in all! O my breast aches with tender love for all!	  O beloved race in all! O my breast aches with tender love for all!	  O beloved race in all! O my breast aches with tender love for all!	  O beloved race in all! O my breast aches with tender love for all!
  O I mourn and yet exult, I am rapt with love for all,	  O I mourn and yet exult, I am rapt with love for all,	  O I mourn and yet exult, I am rapt with love for all,	  O I mourn and yet exult, I am rapt with love for all,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Raise the mighty mother mistress,	       Raise the mighty mother mistress,	       Raise the mighty mother mistress,	       Raise the mighty mother mistress,
  Waving high the delicate mistress, over all the starry mistress,	  Waving high the delicate mistress, over all the starry mistress,	  Waving high the delicate mistress, over all the starry mistress,	  Waving high the delicate mistress, over all the starry mistress,
       (bend your heads all,)	       (bend your heads all,)	       (bend your heads all,)	       (bend your heads all,)
  Raise the fang'd and warlike mistress, stern, impassive, weapon'd mistress,	  Raise the fang'd and warlike mistress, stern, impassive, weapon'd mistress,	  Raise the fang'd and warlike mistress, stern, impassive, weapon'd mistress,	  Raise the fang'd and warlike mistress, stern, impassive, weapon'd mistress,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       See my children, resolute children,	       See my children, resolute children,	       See my children, resolute children,	       See my children, resolute children,
  By those swarms upon our rear we must never yield or falter,	  By those swarms upon our rear we must never yield or falter,	  By those swarms upon our rear we must never yield or falter,	  By those swarms upon our rear we must never yield or falter,
  Ages back in ghostly millions frowning there behind us urging,	  Ages back in ghostly millions frowning there behind us urging,	  Ages back in ghostly millions frowning there behind us urging,	  Ages back in ghostly millions frowning there behind us urging,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       On and on the compact ranks,	       On and on the compact ranks,	       On and on the compact ranks,	       On and on the compact ranks,
  With accessions ever waiting, with the places of the dead quickly fill'd,	  With accessions ever waiting, with the places of the dead quickly fill'd,	  With accessions ever waiting, with the places of the dead quickly fill'd,	  With accessions ever waiting, with the places of the dead quickly fill'd,
  Through the battle, through defeat, moving yet and never stopping,	  Through the battle, through defeat, moving yet and never stopping,	  Through the battle, through defeat, moving yet and never stopping,	  Through the battle, through defeat, moving yet and never stopping,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       O to die advancing on!	       O to die advancing on!	       O to die advancing on!	       O to die advancing on!
  Are there some of us to droop and die? has the hour come?	  Are there some of us to droop and die? has the hour come?	  Are there some of us to droop and die? has the hour come?	  Are there some of us to droop and die? has the hour come?
  Then upon the march we fittest die, soon and sure the gap is fill'd.	  Then upon the march we fittest die, soon and sure the gap is fill'd.	  Then upon the march we fittest die, soon and sure the gap is fill'd.	  Then upon the march we fittest die, soon and sure the gap is fill'd.
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       All the pulses of the world,	       All the pulses of the world,	       All the pulses of the world,	       All the pulses of the world,
  Falling in they beat for us, with the Western movement beat,	  Falling in they beat for us, with the Western movement beat,	  Falling in they beat for us, with the Western movement beat,	  Falling in they beat for us, with the Western movement beat,
  Holding single or together, steady moving to the front, all for us,	  Holding single or together, steady moving to the front, all for us,	  Holding single or together, steady moving to the front, all for us,	  Holding single or together, steady moving to the front, all for us,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Life's involv'd and varied pageants,	       Life's involv'd and varied pageants,	       Life's involv'd and varied pageants,	       Life's involv'd and varied pageants,
  All the forms and shows, all the workmen at their work,	  All the forms and shows, all the workmen at their work,	  All the forms and shows, all the workmen at their work,	  All the forms and shows, all the workmen at their work,
  All the seamen and the landsmen, all the masters with their slaves,	  All the seamen and the landsmen, all the masters with their slaves,	  All the seamen and the landsmen, all the masters with their slaves,	  All the seamen and the landsmen, all the masters with their slaves,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
      All the hapless silent lovers,	      All the hapless silent lovers,	      All the hapless silent lovers,	      All the hapless silent lovers,
  All the prisoners in the prisons, all the righteous and the wicked,	  All the prisoners in the prisons, all the righteous and the wicked,	  All the prisoners in the prisons, all the righteous and the wicked,	  All the prisoners in the prisons, all the righteous and the wicked,
  All the joyous, all the sorrowing, all the living, all the dying,	  All the joyous, all the sorrowing, all the living, all the dying,	  All the joyous, all the sorrowing, all the living, all the dying,	  All the joyous, all the sorrowing, all the living, all the dying,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
      I too with my soul and body,	      I too with my soul and body,	      I too with my soul and body,	      I too with my soul and body,
  We, a curious trio, picking, wandering on our way,	  We, a curious trio, picking, wandering on our way,	  We, a curious trio, picking, wandering on our way,	  We, a curious trio, picking, wandering on our way,
  Through these shores amid the shadows, with the apparitions pressing,	  Through these shores amid the shadows, with the apparitions pressing,	  Through these shores amid the shadows, with the apparitions pressing,	  Through these shores amid the shadows, with the apparitions pressing,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
      Lo, the darting bowling orb!	      Lo, the darting bowling orb!	      Lo, the darting bowling orb!	      Lo, the darting bowling orb!
  Lo, the brother orbs around, all the clustering suns and planets,	  Lo, the brother orbs around, all the clustering suns and planets,	  Lo, the brother orbs around, all the clustering suns and planets,	  Lo, the brother orbs around, all the clustering suns and planets,
  All the dazzling days, all the mystic nights with dreams,	  All the dazzling days, all the mystic nights with dreams,	  All the dazzling days, all the mystic nights with dreams,	  All the dazzling days, all the mystic nights with dreams,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
      These are of us, they are with us,	      These are of us, they are with us,	      These are of us, they are with us,	      These are of us, they are with us,
  All for primal needed work, while the followers there in embryo wait behind,	  All for primal needed work, while the followers there in embryo wait behind,	  All for primal needed work, while the followers there in embryo wait behind,	  All for primal needed work, while the followers there in embryo wait behind,
  We to-day's procession heading, we the route for travel clearing,	  We to-day's procession heading, we the route for travel clearing,	  We to-day's procession heading, we the route for travel clearing,	  We to-day's procession heading, we the route for travel clearing,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
  O you daughters of the West!	  O you daughters of the West!	  O you daughters of the West!	  O you daughters of the West!
  O you young and elder daughters! O you mothers and you wives!	  O you young and elder daughters! O you mothers and you wives!	  O you young and elder daughters! O you mothers and you wives!	  O you young and elder daughters! O you mothers and you wives!
  Never must you be divided, in our ranks you move united,	  Never must you be divided, in our ranks you move united,	  Never must you be divided, in our ranks you move united,	  Never must you be divided, in our ranks you move united,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Minstrels latent on the prairies!	       Minstrels latent on the prairies!	       Minstrels latent on the prairies!	       Minstrels latent on the prairies!
  (Shrouded bards of other lands, you may rest, you have done your work,)	  (Shrouded bards of other lands, you may rest, you have done your work,)	  (Shrouded bards of other lands, you may rest, you have done your work,)	  (Shrouded bards of other lands, you may rest, you have done your work,)
  Soon I hear you coming warbling, soon you rise and tramp amid us,	  Soon I hear you coming warbling, soon you rise and tramp amid us,	  Soon I hear you coming warbling, soon you rise and tramp amid us,	  Soon I hear you coming warbling, soon you rise and tramp amid us,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Not for delectations sweet,	       Not for delectations sweet,	       Not for delectations sweet,	       Not for delectations sweet,
  Not the cushion and the slipper, not the peaceful and the studious,	  Not the cushion and the slipper, not the peaceful and the studious,	  Not the cushion and the slipper, not the peaceful and the studious,	  Not the cushion and the slipper, not the peaceful and the studious,
  Not the riches safe and palling, not for us the tame enjoyment,	  Not the riches safe and palling, not for us the tame enjoyment,	  Not the riches safe and palling, not for us the tame enjoyment,	  Not the riches safe and palling, not for us the tame enjoyment,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Do the feasters gluttonous feast?	       Do the feasters gluttonous feast?	       Do the feasters gluttonous feast?	       Do the feasters gluttonous feast?
  Do the corpulent sleepers sleep? have they lock'd and bolted doors?	  Do the corpulent sleepers sleep? have they lock'd and bolted doors?	  Do the corpulent sleepers sleep? have they lock'd and bolted doors?	  Do the corpulent sleepers sleep? have they lock'd and bolted doors?
  Still be ours the diet hard, and the blanket on the ground,	  Still be ours the diet hard, and the blanket on the ground,	  Still be ours the diet hard, and the blanket on the ground,	  Still be ours the diet hard, and the blanket on the ground,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Has the night descended?	       Has the night descended?	       Has the night descended?	       Has the night descended?
  Was the road of late so toilsome? did we stop discouraged nodding	  Was the road of late so toilsome? did we stop discouraged nodding	  Was the road of late so toilsome? did we stop discouraged nodding	  Was the road of late so toilsome? did we stop discouraged nodding
       on our way?	       on our way?	       on our way?	       on our way?
  Yet a passing hour I yield you in your tracks to pause oblivious,	  Yet a passing hour I yield you in your tracks to pause oblivious,	  Yet a passing hour I yield you in your tracks to pause oblivious,	  Yet a passing hour I yield you in your tracks to pause oblivious,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
       Till with sound of trumpet,	       Till with sound of trumpet,	       Till with sound of trumpet,	       Till with sound of trumpet,
  Far, far off the daybreak call--hark! how loud and clear I hear it wind,	  Far, far off the daybreak call--hark! how loud and clear I hear it wind,	  Far, far off the daybreak call--hark! how loud and clear I hear it wind,	  Far, far off the daybreak call--hark! how loud and clear I hear it wind,
  Swift! to the head of the army!--swift! spring to your places,	  Swift! to the head of the army!--swift! spring to your places,	  Swift! to the head of the army!--swift! spring to your places,	  Swift! to the head of the army!--swift! spring to your places,
       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!	       Pioneers! O pioneers!
			
			
			
			
To You	To You	To You	To You
			
  Whoever you are, I fear you are walking the walks of dreams,	  Whoever you are, I fear you are walking the walks of dreams,	  Whoever you are, I fear you are walking the walks of dreams,	  Whoever you are, I fear you are walking the walks of dreams,
  I fear these supposed realities are to melt from under your feet and hands,	  I fear these supposed realities are to melt from under your feet and hands,	  I fear these supposed realities are to melt from under your feet and hands,	  I fear these supposed realities are to melt from under your feet and hands,
  Even now your features, joys, speech, house, trade, manners,	  Even now your features, joys, speech, house, trade, manners,	  Even now your features, joys, speech, house, trade, manners,	  Even now your features, joys, speech, house, trade, manners,
      troubles, follies, costume, crimes, dissipate away from you,	      troubles, follies, costume, crimes, dissipate away from you,	      troubles, follies, costume, crimes, dissipate away from you,	      troubles, follies, costume, crimes, dissipate away from you,
  Your true soul and body appear before me.	  Your true soul and body appear before me.	  Your true soul and body appear before me.	  Your true soul and body appear before me.
  They stand forth out of affairs, out of commerce, shops, work,	  They stand forth out of affairs, out of commerce, shops, work,	  They stand forth out of affairs, out of commerce, shops, work,	  They stand forth out of affairs, out of commerce, shops, work,
      farms, clothes, the house, buying, selling, eating, drinking,	      farms, clothes, the house, buying, selling, eating, drinking,	      farms, clothes, the house, buying, selling, eating, drinking,	      farms, clothes, the house, buying, selling, eating, drinking,
      suffering, dying.	      suffering, dying.	      suffering, dying.	      suffering, dying.
			
  Whoever you are, now I place my hand upon you, that you be my poem,	  Whoever you are, now I place my hand upon you, that you be my poem,	  Whoever you are, now I place my hand upon you, that you be my poem,	  Whoever you are, now I place my hand upon you, that you be my poem,
  I whisper with my lips close to your ear.	  I whisper with my lips close to your ear.	  I whisper with my lips close to your ear.	  I whisper with my lips close to your ear.
  I have loved many women and men, but I love none better than you.	  I have loved many women and men, but I love none better than you.	  I have loved many women and men, but I love none better than you.	  I have loved many women and men, but I love none better than you.
			
  O I have been dilatory and dumb,	  O I have been dilatory and dumb,	  O I have been dilatory and dumb,	  O I have been dilatory and dumb,
  I should have made my way straight to you long ago,	  I should have made my way straight to you long ago,	  I should have made my way straight to you long ago,	  I should have made my way straight to you long ago,
  I should have blabb'd nothing but you, I should have chanted nothing	  I should have blabb'd nothing but you, I should have chanted nothing	  I should have blabb'd nothing but you, I should have chanted nothing	  I should have blabb'd nothing but you, I should have chanted nothing
      but you.	      but you.	      but you.	      but you.
			
  I will leave all and come and make the hymns of you,	  I will leave all and come and make the hymns of you,	  I will leave all and come and make the hymns of you,	  I will leave all and come and make the hymns of you,
  None has understood you, but I understand you,	  None has understood you, but I understand you,	  None has understood you, but I understand you,	  None has understood you, but I understand you,
  None has done justice to you, you have not done justice to yourself,	  None has done justice to you, you have not done justice to yourself,	  None has done justice to you, you have not done justice to yourself,	  None has done justice to you, you have not done justice to yourself,
  None but has found you imperfect, I only find no imperfection in you,	  None but has found you imperfect, I only find no imperfection in you,	  None but has found you imperfect, I only find no imperfection in you,	  None but has found you imperfect, I only find no imperfection in you,
  None but would subordinate you, I only am he who will never consent	  None but would subordinate you, I only am he who will never consent	  None but would subordinate you, I only am he who will never consent	  None but would subordinate you, I only am he who will never consent
      to subordinate you,	      to subordinate you,	      to subordinate you,	      to subordinate you,
  I only am he who places over you no master, owner, better, God,	  I only am he who places over you no master, owner, better, God,	  I only am he who places over you no master, owner, better, God,	  I only am he who places over you no master, owner, better, God,
      beyond what waits intrinsically in yourself.	      beyond what waits intrinsically in yourself.	      beyond what waits intrinsically in yourself.	      beyond what waits intrinsically in yourself.
			
  Painters have painted their swarming groups and the centre-figure of all,	  Painters have painted their swarming groups and the centre-figure of all,	  Painters have painted their swarming groups and the centre-figure of all,	  Painters have painted their swarming groups and the centre-figure of all,
  From the head of the centre-figure spreading a nimbus of gold-color'd light,	  From the head of the centre-figure spreading a nimbus of gold-color'd light,	  From the head of the centre-figure spreading a nimbus of gold-color'd light,	  From the head of the centre-figure spreading a nimbus of gold-color'd light,
  But I paint myriads of heads, but paint no head without its nimbus	  But I paint myriads of heads, but paint no head without its nimbus	  But I paint myriads of heads, but paint no head without its nimbus	  But I paint myriads of heads, but paint no head without its nimbus
      of gold-color'd light,	      of gold-color'd light,	      of gold-color'd light,	      of gold-color'd light,
  From my hand from the brain of every man and woman it streams,	  From my hand from the brain of every man and woman it streams,	  From my hand from the brain of every man and woman it streams,	  From my hand from the brain of every man and woman it streams,
      effulgently flowing forever.	      effulgently flowing forever.	      effulgently flowing forever.	      effulgently flowing forever.
			
  O I could sing such grandeurs and glories about you!	  O I could sing such grandeurs and glories about you!	  O I could sing such grandeurs and glories about you!	  O I could sing such grandeurs and glories about you!
  You have not known what you are, you have slumber'd upon yourself	  You have not known what you are, you have slumber'd upon yourself	  You have not known what you are, you have slumber'd upon yourself	  You have not known what you are, you have slumber'd upon yourself
      all your life,	      all your life,	      all your life,	      all your life,
  Your eyelids have been the same as closed most of the time,	  Your eyelids have been the same as closed most of the time,	  Your eyelids have been the same as closed most of the time,	  Your eyelids have been the same as closed most of the time,
  What you have done returns already in mockeries,	  What you have done returns already in mockeries,	  What you have done returns already in mockeries,	  What you have done returns already in mockeries,
  (Your thrift, knowledge, prayers, if they do not return in	  (Your thrift, knowledge, prayers, if they do not return in	  (Your thrift, knowledge, prayers, if they do not return in	  (Your thrift, knowledge, prayers, if they do not return in
      mockeries, what is their return?)	      mockeries, what is their return?)	      mockeries, what is their return?)	      mockeries, what is their return?)
			
  The mockeries are not you,	  The mockeries are not you,	  The mockeries are not you,	  The mockeries are not you,
  Underneath them and within them I see you lurk,	  Underneath them and within them I see you lurk,	  Underneath them and within them I see you lurk,	  Underneath them and within them I see you lurk,
  I pursue you where none else has pursued you,	  I pursue you where none else has pursued you,	  I pursue you where none else has pursued you,	  I pursue you where none else has pursued you,
  Silence, the desk, the flippant expression, the night, the	  Silence, the desk, the flippant expression, the night, the	  Silence, the desk, the flippant expression, the night, the	  Silence, the desk, the flippant expression, the night, the
      accustom'd routine, if these conceal you from others or from	      accustom'd routine, if these conceal you from others or from	      accustom'd routine, if these conceal you from others or from	      accustom'd routine, if these conceal you from others or from
      yourself, they do not conceal you from me,	      yourself, they do not conceal you from me,	      yourself, they do not conceal you from me,	      yourself, they do not conceal you from me,
  The shaved face, the unsteady eye, the impure complexion, if these	  The shaved face, the unsteady eye, the impure complexion, if these	  The shaved face, the unsteady eye, the impure complexion, if these	  The shaved face, the unsteady eye, the impure complexion, if these
      balk others they do not balk me,	      balk others they do not balk me,	      balk others they do not balk me,	      balk others they do not balk me,
  The pert apparel, the deform'd attitude, drunkenness, greed,	  The pert apparel, the deform'd attitude, drunkenness, greed,	  The pert apparel, the deform'd attitude, drunkenness, greed,	  The pert apparel, the deform'd attitude, drunkenness, greed,
      premature death, all these I part aside.	      premature death, all these I part aside.	      premature death, all these I part aside.	      premature death, all these I part aside.
			
  There is no endowment in man or woman that is not tallied in you,	  There is no endowment in man or woman that is not tallied in you,	  There is no endowment in man or woman that is not tallied in you,	  There is no endowment in man or woman that is not tallied in you,
  There is no virtue, no beauty in man or woman, but as good is in you,	  There is no virtue, no beauty in man or woman, but as good is in you,	  There is no virtue, no beauty in man or woman, but as good is in you,	  There is no virtue, no beauty in man or woman, but as good is in you,
  No pluck, no endurance in others, but as good is in you,	  No pluck, no endurance in others, but as good is in you,	  No pluck, no endurance in others, but as good is in you,	  No pluck, no endurance in others, but as good is in you,
  No pleasure waiting for others, but an equal pleasure waits for you.	  No pleasure waiting for others, but an equal pleasure waits for you.	  No pleasure waiting for others, but an equal pleasure waits for you.	  No pleasure waiting for others, but an equal pleasure waits for you.
			
  As for me, I give nothing to any one except I give the like carefully	  As for me, I give nothing to any one except I give the like carefully	  As for me, I give nothing to any one except I give the like carefully	  As for me, I give nothing to any one except I give the like carefully
      to you,	      to you,	      to you,	      to you,
  I sing the songs of the glory of none, not God, sooner than I sing	  I sing the songs of the glory of none, not God, sooner than I sing	  I sing the songs of the glory of none, not God, sooner than I sing	  I sing the songs of the glory of none, not God, sooner than I sing
      the songs of the glory of you.	      the songs of the glory of you.	      the songs of the glory of you.	      the songs of the glory of you.
			
  Whoever you are! claim your own at any hazard!	  Whoever you are! claim your own at any hazard!	  Whoever you are! claim your own at any hazard!	  Whoever you are! claim your own at any hazard!
  These shows of the East and West are tame compared to you,	  These shows of the East and West are tame compared to you,	  These shows of the East and West are tame compared to you,	  These shows of the East and West are tame compared to you,
  These immense meadows, these interminable rivers, you are immense	  These immense meadows, these interminable rivers, you are immense	  These immense meadows, these interminable rivers, you are immense	  These immense meadows, these interminable rivers, you are immense
      and interminable as they,	      and interminable as they,	      and interminable as they,	      and interminable as they,
  These furies, elements, storms, motions of Nature, throes of apparent	  These furies, elements, storms, motions of Nature, throes of apparent	  These furies, elements, storms, motions of Nature, throes of apparent	  These furies, elements, storms, motions of Nature, throes of apparent
      dissolution, you are he or she who is master or mistress over them,	      dissolution, you are he or she who is master or mistress over them,	      dissolution, you are he or she who is master or mistress over them,	      dissolution, you are he or she who is master or mistress over them,
  Master or mistress in your own right over Nature, elements, pain,	  Master or mistress in your own right over Nature, elements, pain,	  Master or mistress in your own right over Nature, elements, pain,	  Master or mistress in your own right over Nature, elements, pain,
      passion, dissolution.	      passion, dissolution.	      passion, dissolution.	      passion, dissolution.
			
  The hopples fall from your ankles, you find an unfailing sufficiency,	  The hopples fall from your ankles, you find an unfailing sufficiency,	  The hopples fall from your ankles, you find an unfailing sufficiency,	  The hopples fall from your ankles, you find an unfailing sufficiency,
  Old or young, male or female, rude, low, rejected by the rest,	  Old or young, male or female, rude, low, rejected by the rest,	  Old or young, male or female, rude, low, rejected by the rest,	  Old or young, male or female, rude, low, rejected by the rest,
      whatever you are promulges itself,	      whatever you are promulges itself,	      whatever you are promulges itself,	      whatever you are promulges itself,
  Through birth, life, death, burial, the means are provided, nothing	  Through birth, life, death, burial, the means are provided, nothing	  Through birth, life, death, burial, the means are provided, nothing	  Through birth, life, death, burial, the means are provided, nothing
      is scanted,	      is scanted,	      is scanted,	      is scanted,
  Through angers, losses, ambition, ignorance, ennui, what you are	  Through angers, losses, ambition, ignorance, ennui, what you are	  Through angers, losses, ambition, ignorance, ennui, what you are	  Through angers, losses, ambition, ignorance, ennui, what you are
      picks its way.	      picks its way.	      picks its way.	      picks its way.
			
			
			
			
France [the 18th Year of these States	France [the 18th Year of these States	France [the 18th Year of these States	France [the 18th Year of these States
			
  A great year and place	  A great year and place	  A great year and place	  A great year and place
  A harsh discordant natal scream out-sounding, to touch the mother's	  A harsh discordant natal scream out-sounding, to touch the mother's	  A harsh discordant natal scream out-sounding, to touch the mother's	  A harsh discordant natal scream out-sounding, to touch the mother's
      heart closer than any yet.	      heart closer than any yet.	      heart closer than any yet.	      heart closer than any yet.
			
  I walk'd the shores of my Eastern sea,	  I walk'd the shores of my Eastern sea,	  I walk'd the shores of my Eastern sea,	  I walk'd the shores of my Eastern sea,
  Heard over the waves the little voice,	  Heard over the waves the little voice,	  Heard over the waves the little voice,	  Heard over the waves the little voice,
  Saw the divine infant where she woke mournfully wailing, amid the	  Saw the divine infant where she woke mournfully wailing, amid the	  Saw the divine infant where she woke mournfully wailing, amid the	  Saw the divine infant where she woke mournfully wailing, amid the
      roar of cannon, curses, shouts, crash of falling buildings,	      roar of cannon, curses, shouts, crash of falling buildings,	      roar of cannon, curses, shouts, crash of falling buildings,	      roar of cannon, curses, shouts, crash of falling buildings,
  Was not so sick from the blood in the gutters running, nor from the single	  Was not so sick from the blood in the gutters running, nor from the single	  Was not so sick from the blood in the gutters running, nor from the single	  Was not so sick from the blood in the gutters running, nor from the single
      corpses, nor those in heaps, nor those borne away in the tumbrils,	      corpses, nor those in heaps, nor those borne away in the tumbrils,	      corpses, nor those in heaps, nor those borne away in the tumbrils,	      corpses, nor those in heaps, nor those borne away in the tumbrils,
  Was not so desperate at the battues of death--was not so shock'd at	  Was not so desperate at the battues of death--was not so shock'd at	  Was not so desperate at the battues of death--was not so shock'd at	  Was not so desperate at the battues of death--was not so shock'd at
      the repeated fusillades of the guns.	      the repeated fusillades of the guns.	      the repeated fusillades of the guns.	      the repeated fusillades of the guns.
			
  Pale, silent, stern, what could I say to that long-accrued retribution?	  Pale, silent, stern, what could I say to that long-accrued retribution?	  Pale, silent, stern, what could I say to that long-accrued retribution?	  Pale, silent, stern, what could I say to that long-accrued retribution?
  Could I wish humanity different?	  Could I wish humanity different?	  Could I wish humanity different?	  Could I wish humanity different?
  Could I wish the people made of wood and stone?	  Could I wish the people made of wood and stone?	  Could I wish the people made of wood and stone?	  Could I wish the people made of wood and stone?
  Or that there be no justice in destiny or time?	  Or that there be no justice in destiny or time?	  Or that there be no justice in destiny or time?	  Or that there be no justice in destiny or time?
			
  O Liberty! O mate for me!	  O Liberty! O mate for me!	  O Liberty! O mate for me!	  O Liberty! O mate for me!
  Here too the blaze, the grape-shot and the axe, in reserve, to fetch	  Here too the blaze, the grape-shot and the axe, in reserve, to fetch	  Here too the blaze, the grape-shot and the axe, in reserve, to fetch	  Here too the blaze, the grape-shot and the axe, in reserve, to fetch
      them out in case of need,	      them out in case of need,	      them out in case of need,	      them out in case of need,
  Here too, though long represt, can never be destroy'd,	  Here too, though long represt, can never be destroy'd,	  Here too, though long represt, can never be destroy'd,	  Here too, though long represt, can never be destroy'd,
  Here too could rise at last murdering and ecstatic,	  Here too could rise at last murdering and ecstatic,	  Here too could rise at last murdering and ecstatic,	  Here too could rise at last murdering and ecstatic,
  Here too demanding full arrears of vengeance.	  Here too demanding full arrears of vengeance.	  Here too demanding full arrears of vengeance.	  Here too demanding full arrears of vengeance.
			
  Hence I sign this salute over the sea,	  Hence I sign this salute over the sea,	  Hence I sign this salute over the sea,	  Hence I sign this salute over the sea,
  And I do not deny that terrible red birth and baptism,	  And I do not deny that terrible red birth and baptism,	  And I do not deny that terrible red birth and baptism,	  And I do not deny that terrible red birth and baptism,
  But remember the little voice that I heard wailing, and wait with	  But remember the little voice that I heard wailing, and wait with	  But remember the little voice that I heard wailing, and wait with	  But remember the little voice that I heard wailing, and wait with
      perfect trust, no matter how long,	      perfect trust, no matter how long,	      perfect trust, no matter how long,	      perfect trust, no matter how long,
  And from to-day sad and cogent I maintain the bequeath'd cause, as	  And from to-day sad and cogent I maintain the bequeath'd cause, as	  And from to-day sad and cogent I maintain the bequeath'd cause, as	  And from to-day sad and cogent I maintain the bequeath'd cause, as
      for all lands,	      for all lands,	      for all lands,	      for all lands,
  And I send these words to Paris with my love,	  And I send these words to Paris with my love,	  And I send these words to Paris with my love,	  And I send these words to Paris with my love,
  And I guess some chansonniers there will understand them,	  And I guess some chansonniers there will understand them,	  And I guess some chansonniers there will understand them,	  And I guess some chansonniers there will understand them,
  For I guess there is latent music yet in France, floods of it,	  For I guess there is latent music yet in France, floods of it,	  For I guess there is latent music yet in France, floods of it,	  For I guess there is latent music yet in France, floods of it,
  O I hear already the bustle of instruments, they will soon be	  O I hear already the bustle of instruments, they will soon be	  O I hear already the bustle of instruments, they will soon be	  O I hear already the bustle of instruments, they will soon be
      drowning all that would interrupt them,	      drowning all that would interrupt them,	      drowning all that would interrupt them,	      drowning all that would interrupt them,
  O I think the east wind brings a triumphal and free march,	  O I think the east wind brings a triumphal and free march,	  O I think the east wind brings a triumphal and free march,	  O I think the east wind brings a triumphal and free march,
  It reaches hither, it swells me to Joyful madness,	  It reaches hither, it swells me to Joyful madness,	  It reaches hither, it swells me to Joyful madness,	  It reaches hither, it swells me to Joyful madness,
  I will run transpose it in words, to justify	  I will run transpose it in words, to justify	  I will run transpose it in words, to justify	  I will run transpose it in words, to justify
  I will yet sing a song for you ma femme.	  I will yet sing a song for you ma femme.	  I will yet sing a song for you ma femme.	  I will yet sing a song for you ma femme.
			
			
			
			
Myself and Mine	Myself and Mine	Myself and Mine	Myself and Mine
			
  Myself and mine gymnastic ever,	  Myself and mine gymnastic ever,	  Myself and mine gymnastic ever,	  Myself and mine gymnastic ever,
  To stand the cold or heat, to take good aim with a gun, to sail a	  To stand the cold or heat, to take good aim with a gun, to sail a	  To stand the cold or heat, to take good aim with a gun, to sail a	  To stand the cold or heat, to take good aim with a gun, to sail a
      boat, to manage horses, to beget superb children,	      boat, to manage horses, to beget superb children,	      boat, to manage horses, to beget superb children,	      boat, to manage horses, to beget superb children,
  To speak readily and clearly, to feel at home among common people,	  To speak readily and clearly, to feel at home among common people,	  To speak readily and clearly, to feel at home among common people,	  To speak readily and clearly, to feel at home among common people,
  And to hold our own in terrible positions on land and sea.	  And to hold our own in terrible positions on land and sea.	  And to hold our own in terrible positions on land and sea.	  And to hold our own in terrible positions on land and sea.
			
  Not for an embroiderer,	  Not for an embroiderer,	  Not for an embroiderer,	  Not for an embroiderer,
  (There will always be plenty of embroiderers, I welcome them also,)	  (There will always be plenty of embroiderers, I welcome them also,)	  (There will always be plenty of embroiderers, I welcome them also,)	  (There will always be plenty of embroiderers, I welcome them also,)
  But for the fibre of things and for inherent men and women.	  But for the fibre of things and for inherent men and women.	  But for the fibre of things and for inherent men and women.	  But for the fibre of things and for inherent men and women.
			
  Not to chisel ornaments,	  Not to chisel ornaments,	  Not to chisel ornaments,	  Not to chisel ornaments,
  But to chisel with free stroke the heads and limbs of plenteous	  But to chisel with free stroke the heads and limbs of plenteous	  But to chisel with free stroke the heads and limbs of plenteous	  But to chisel with free stroke the heads and limbs of plenteous
      supreme Gods, that the States may realize them walking and talking.	      supreme Gods, that the States may realize them walking and talking.	      supreme Gods, that the States may realize them walking and talking.	      supreme Gods, that the States may realize them walking and talking.
			
  Let me have my own way,	  Let me have my own way,	  Let me have my own way,	  Let me have my own way,
  Let others promulge the laws, I will make no account of the laws,	  Let others promulge the laws, I will make no account of the laws,	  Let others promulge the laws, I will make no account of the laws,	  Let others promulge the laws, I will make no account of the laws,
  Let others praise eminent men and hold up peace, I hold up agitation	  Let others praise eminent men and hold up peace, I hold up agitation	  Let others praise eminent men and hold up peace, I hold up agitation	  Let others praise eminent men and hold up peace, I hold up agitation
      and conflict,	      and conflict,	      and conflict,	      and conflict,
  I praise no eminent man, I rebuke to his face the one that was	  I praise no eminent man, I rebuke to his face the one that was	  I praise no eminent man, I rebuke to his face the one that was	  I praise no eminent man, I rebuke to his face the one that was
      thought most worthy.	      thought most worthy.	      thought most worthy.	      thought most worthy.
			
  (Who are you? and what are you secretly guilty of all your life?	  (Who are you? and what are you secretly guilty of all your life?	  (Who are you? and what are you secretly guilty of all your life?	  (Who are you? and what are you secretly guilty of all your life?
  Will you turn aside all your life? will you grub and chatter all	  Will you turn aside all your life? will you grub and chatter all	  Will you turn aside all your life? will you grub and chatter all	  Will you turn aside all your life? will you grub and chatter all
      your life?	      your life?	      your life?	      your life?
  And who are you, blabbing by rote, years, pages, languages, reminiscences,	  And who are you, blabbing by rote, years, pages, languages, reminiscences,	  And who are you, blabbing by rote, years, pages, languages, reminiscences,	  And who are you, blabbing by rote, years, pages, languages, reminiscences,
  Unwitting to-day that you do not know how to speak properly a single word?)	  Unwitting to-day that you do not know how to speak properly a single word?)	  Unwitting to-day that you do not know how to speak properly a single word?)	  Unwitting to-day that you do not know how to speak properly a single word?)
			
  Let others finish specimens, I never finish specimens,	  Let others finish specimens, I never finish specimens,	  Let others finish specimens, I never finish specimens,	  Let others finish specimens, I never finish specimens,
  I start them by exhaustless laws as Nature does, fresh and modern	  I start them by exhaustless laws as Nature does, fresh and modern	  I start them by exhaustless laws as Nature does, fresh and modern	  I start them by exhaustless laws as Nature does, fresh and modern
      continually.	      continually.	      continually.	      continually.
			
  I give nothing as duties,	  I give nothing as duties,	  I give nothing as duties,	  I give nothing as duties,
  What others give as duties I give as living impulses,	  What others give as duties I give as living impulses,	  What others give as duties I give as living impulses,	  What others give as duties I give as living impulses,
  (Shall I give the heart's action as a duty?)	  (Shall I give the heart's action as a duty?)	  (Shall I give the heart's action as a duty?)	  (Shall I give the heart's action as a duty?)
			
  Let others dispose of questions, I dispose of nothing, I arouse	  Let others dispose of questions, I dispose of nothing, I arouse	  Let others dispose of questions, I dispose of nothing, I arouse	  Let others dispose of questions, I dispose of nothing, I arouse
      unanswerable questions,	      unanswerable questions,	      unanswerable questions,	      unanswerable questions,
  Who are they I see and touch, and what about them?	  Who are they I see and touch, and what about them?	  Who are they I see and touch, and what about them?	  Who are they I see and touch, and what about them?
  What about these likes of myself that draw me so close by tender	  What about these likes of myself that draw me so close by tender	  What about these likes of myself that draw me so close by tender	  What about these likes of myself that draw me so close by tender
      directions and indirections?	      directions and indirections?	      directions and indirections?	      directions and indirections?
			
  I call to the world to distrust the accounts of my friends, but	  I call to the world to distrust the accounts of my friends, but	  I call to the world to distrust the accounts of my friends, but	  I call to the world to distrust the accounts of my friends, but
      listen to my enemies, as I myself do,	      listen to my enemies, as I myself do,	      listen to my enemies, as I myself do,	      listen to my enemies, as I myself do,
  I charge you forever reject those who would expound me, for I cannot	  I charge you forever reject those who would expound me, for I cannot	  I charge you forever reject those who would expound me, for I cannot	  I charge you forever reject those who would expound me, for I cannot
      expound myself,	      expound myself,	      expound myself,	      expound myself,
  I charge that there be no theory or school founded out of me,	  I charge that there be no theory or school founded out of me,	  I charge that there be no theory or school founded out of me,	  I charge that there be no theory or school founded out of me,
  I charge you to leave all free, as I have left all free.	  I charge you to leave all free, as I have left all free.	  I charge you to leave all free, as I have left all free.	  I charge you to leave all free, as I have left all free.
			
  After me, vista!	  After me, vista!	  After me, vista!	  After me, vista!
  O I see life is not short, but immeasurably long,	  O I see life is not short, but immeasurably long,	  O I see life is not short, but immeasurably long,	  O I see life is not short, but immeasurably long,
  I henceforth tread the world chaste, temperate, an early riser, a	  I henceforth tread the world chaste, temperate, an early riser, a	  I henceforth tread the world chaste, temperate, an early riser, a	  I henceforth tread the world chaste, temperate, an early riser, a
      steady grower,	      steady grower,	      steady grower,	      steady grower,
  Every hour the semen of centuries, and still of centuries.	  Every hour the semen of centuries, and still of centuries.	  Every hour the semen of centuries, and still of centuries.	  Every hour the semen of centuries, and still of centuries.
			
  I must follow up these continual lessons of the air, water, earth,	  I must follow up these continual lessons of the air, water, earth,	  I must follow up these continual lessons of the air, water, earth,	  I must follow up these continual lessons of the air, water, earth,
  I perceive I have no time to lose.	  I perceive I have no time to lose.	  I perceive I have no time to lose.	  I perceive I have no time to lose.
			
			
			
			
Year of Meteors [1859-60	Year of Meteors [1859-60	Year of Meteors [1859-60	Year of Meteors [1859-60
			
  Year of meteors! brooding year!	  Year of meteors! brooding year!	  Year of meteors! brooding year!	  Year of meteors! brooding year!
  I would bind in words retrospective some of your deeds and signs,	  I would bind in words retrospective some of your deeds and signs,	  I would bind in words retrospective some of your deeds and signs,	  I would bind in words retrospective some of your deeds and signs,
  I would sing your contest for the 19th Presidentiad,	  I would sing your contest for the 19th Presidentiad,	  I would sing your contest for the 19th Presidentiad,	  I would sing your contest for the 19th Presidentiad,
  I would sing how an old man, tall, with white hair, mounted the	  I would sing how an old man, tall, with white hair, mounted the	  I would sing how an old man, tall, with white hair, mounted the	  I would sing how an old man, tall, with white hair, mounted the
      scaffold in Virginia,	      scaffold in Virginia,	      scaffold in Virginia,	      scaffold in Virginia,
  (I was at hand, silent I stood with teeth shut close, I watch'd,	  (I was at hand, silent I stood with teeth shut close, I watch'd,	  (I was at hand, silent I stood with teeth shut close, I watch'd,	  (I was at hand, silent I stood with teeth shut close, I watch'd,
  I stood very near you old man when cool and indifferent, but trembling	  I stood very near you old man when cool and indifferent, but trembling	  I stood very near you old man when cool and indifferent, but trembling	  I stood very near you old man when cool and indifferent, but trembling
      with age and your unheal'd wounds you mounted the scaffold;)	      with age and your unheal'd wounds you mounted the scaffold;)	      with age and your unheal'd wounds you mounted the scaffold;)	      with age and your unheal'd wounds you mounted the scaffold;)
  I would sing in my copious song your census returns of the States,	  I would sing in my copious song your census returns of the States,	  I would sing in my copious song your census returns of the States,	  I would sing in my copious song your census returns of the States,
  The tables of population and products, I would sing of your ships	  The tables of population and products, I would sing of your ships	  The tables of population and products, I would sing of your ships	  The tables of population and products, I would sing of your ships
      and their cargoes,	      and their cargoes,	      and their cargoes,	      and their cargoes,
  The proud black ships of Manhattan arriving, some fill'd with	  The proud black ships of Manhattan arriving, some fill'd with	  The proud black ships of Manhattan arriving, some fill'd with	  The proud black ships of Manhattan arriving, some fill'd with
      immigrants, some from the isthmus with cargoes of gold,	      immigrants, some from the isthmus with cargoes of gold,	      immigrants, some from the isthmus with cargoes of gold,	      immigrants, some from the isthmus with cargoes of gold,
  Songs thereof would I sing, to all that hitherward comes would welcome give,	  Songs thereof would I sing, to all that hitherward comes would welcome give,	  Songs thereof would I sing, to all that hitherward comes would welcome give,	  Songs thereof would I sing, to all that hitherward comes would welcome give,
  And you would I sing, fair stripling! welcome to you from me, young	  And you would I sing, fair stripling! welcome to you from me, young	  And you would I sing, fair stripling! welcome to you from me, young	  And you would I sing, fair stripling! welcome to you from me, young
      prince of England!	      prince of England!	      prince of England!	      prince of England!
  (Remember you surging Manhattan's crowds as you pass'd with your	  (Remember you surging Manhattan's crowds as you pass'd with your	  (Remember you surging Manhattan's crowds as you pass'd with your	  (Remember you surging Manhattan's crowds as you pass'd with your
      cortege of nobles?	      cortege of nobles?	      cortege of nobles?	      cortege of nobles?
  There in the crowds stood I, and singled you out with attachment;)	  There in the crowds stood I, and singled you out with attachment;)	  There in the crowds stood I, and singled you out with attachment;)	  There in the crowds stood I, and singled you out with attachment;)
  Nor forget I to sing of the wonder, the ship as she swam up my bay,	  Nor forget I to sing of the wonder, the ship as she swam up my bay,	  Nor forget I to sing of the wonder, the ship as she swam up my bay,	  Nor forget I to sing of the wonder, the ship as she swam up my bay,
  Well-shaped and stately the Great Eastern swam up my bay, she was	  Well-shaped and stately the Great Eastern swam up my bay, she was	  Well-shaped and stately the Great Eastern swam up my bay, she was	  Well-shaped and stately the Great Eastern swam up my bay, she was
      600 feet long,	      600 feet long,	      600 feet long,	      600 feet long,
  Her moving swiftly surrounded by myriads of small craft I forget not	  Her moving swiftly surrounded by myriads of small craft I forget not	  Her moving swiftly surrounded by myriads of small craft I forget not	  Her moving swiftly surrounded by myriads of small craft I forget not
      to sing;	      to sing;	      to sing;	      to sing;
  Nor the comet that came unannounced out of the north flaring in heaven,	  Nor the comet that came unannounced out of the north flaring in heaven,	  Nor the comet that came unannounced out of the north flaring in heaven,	  Nor the comet that came unannounced out of the north flaring in heaven,
  Nor the strange huge meteor-procession dazzling and clear shooting	  Nor the strange huge meteor-procession dazzling and clear shooting	  Nor the strange huge meteor-procession dazzling and clear shooting	  Nor the strange huge meteor-procession dazzling and clear shooting
      over our heads,	      over our heads,	      over our heads,	      over our heads,
  (A moment, a moment long it sail'd its balls of unearthly light over	  (A moment, a moment long it sail'd its balls of unearthly light over	  (A moment, a moment long it sail'd its balls of unearthly light over	  (A moment, a moment long it sail'd its balls of unearthly light over
      our heads,	      our heads,	      our heads,	      our heads,
  Then departed, dropt in the night, and was gone;)	  Then departed, dropt in the night, and was gone;)	  Then departed, dropt in the night, and was gone;)	  Then departed, dropt in the night, and was gone;)
  Of such, and fitful as they, I sing--with gleams from them would	  Of such, and fitful as they, I sing--with gleams from them would	  Of such, and fitful as they, I sing--with gleams from them would	  Of such, and fitful as they, I sing--with gleams from them would
      gleam and patch these chants,	      gleam and patch these chants,	      gleam and patch these chants,	      gleam and patch these chants,
  Your chants, O year all mottled with evil and good--year of forebodings!	  Your chants, O year all mottled with evil and good--year of forebodings!	  Your chants, O year all mottled with evil and good--year of forebodings!	  Your chants, O year all mottled with evil and good--year of forebodings!
  Year of comets and meteors transient and strange--lo! even here one	  Year of comets and meteors transient and strange--lo! even here one	  Year of comets and meteors transient and strange--lo! even here one	  Year of comets and meteors transient and strange--lo! even here one
      equally transient and strange!	      equally transient and strange!	      equally transient and strange!	      equally transient and strange!
  As I flit through you hastily, soon to fall and be gone, what is this chant,	  As I flit through you hastily, soon to fall and be gone, what is this chant,	  As I flit through you hastily, soon to fall and be gone, what is this chant,	  As I flit through you hastily, soon to fall and be gone, what is this chant,
  What am I myself but one of your meteors?	  What am I myself but one of your meteors?	  What am I myself but one of your meteors?	  What am I myself but one of your meteors?
			
			
			
			
With Antecedents	With Antecedents	With Antecedents	With Antecedents
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  With antecedents,	  With antecedents,	  With antecedents,	  With antecedents,
  With my fathers and mothers and the accumulations of past ages,	  With my fathers and mothers and the accumulations of past ages,	  With my fathers and mothers and the accumulations of past ages,	  With my fathers and mothers and the accumulations of past ages,
  With all which, had it not been, I would not now be here, as I am,	  With all which, had it not been, I would not now be here, as I am,	  With all which, had it not been, I would not now be here, as I am,	  With all which, had it not been, I would not now be here, as I am,
  With Egypt, India, Phenicia, Greece and Rome,	  With Egypt, India, Phenicia, Greece and Rome,	  With Egypt, India, Phenicia, Greece and Rome,	  With Egypt, India, Phenicia, Greece and Rome,
  With the Kelt, the Scandinavian, the Alb and the Saxon,	  With the Kelt, the Scandinavian, the Alb and the Saxon,	  With the Kelt, the Scandinavian, the Alb and the Saxon,	  With the Kelt, the Scandinavian, the Alb and the Saxon,
  With antique maritime ventures, laws, artisanship, wars and journeys,	  With antique maritime ventures, laws, artisanship, wars and journeys,	  With antique maritime ventures, laws, artisanship, wars and journeys,	  With antique maritime ventures, laws, artisanship, wars and journeys,
  With the poet, the skald, the saga, the myth, and the oracle,	  With the poet, the skald, the saga, the myth, and the oracle,	  With the poet, the skald, the saga, the myth, and the oracle,	  With the poet, the skald, the saga, the myth, and the oracle,
  With the sale of slaves, with enthusiasts, with the troubadour, the	  With the sale of slaves, with enthusiasts, with the troubadour, the	  With the sale of slaves, with enthusiasts, with the troubadour, the	  With the sale of slaves, with enthusiasts, with the troubadour, the
      crusader, and the monk,	      crusader, and the monk,	      crusader, and the monk,	      crusader, and the monk,
  With those old continents whence we have come to this new continent,	  With those old continents whence we have come to this new continent,	  With those old continents whence we have come to this new continent,	  With those old continents whence we have come to this new continent,
  With the fading kingdoms and kings over there,	  With the fading kingdoms and kings over there,	  With the fading kingdoms and kings over there,	  With the fading kingdoms and kings over there,
  With the fading religions and priests,	  With the fading religions and priests,	  With the fading religions and priests,	  With the fading religions and priests,
  With the small shores we look back to from our own large and present shores,	  With the small shores we look back to from our own large and present shores,	  With the small shores we look back to from our own large and present shores,	  With the small shores we look back to from our own large and present shores,
  With countless years drawing themselves onward and arrived at these years,	  With countless years drawing themselves onward and arrived at these years,	  With countless years drawing themselves onward and arrived at these years,	  With countless years drawing themselves onward and arrived at these years,
  You and me arrived--America arrived and making this year,	  You and me arrived--America arrived and making this year,	  You and me arrived--America arrived and making this year,	  You and me arrived--America arrived and making this year,
  This year! sending itself ahead countless years to come.	  This year! sending itself ahead countless years to come.	  This year! sending itself ahead countless years to come.	  This year! sending itself ahead countless years to come.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  O but it is not the years--it is I, it is You,	  O but it is not the years--it is I, it is You,	  O but it is not the years--it is I, it is You,	  O but it is not the years--it is I, it is You,
  We touch all laws and tally all antecedents,	  We touch all laws and tally all antecedents,	  We touch all laws and tally all antecedents,	  We touch all laws and tally all antecedents,
  We are the skald, the oracle, the monk and the knight, we easily	  We are the skald, the oracle, the monk and the knight, we easily	  We are the skald, the oracle, the monk and the knight, we easily	  We are the skald, the oracle, the monk and the knight, we easily
      include them and more,	      include them and more,	      include them and more,	      include them and more,
  We stand amid time beginningless and endless, we stand amid evil and good,	  We stand amid time beginningless and endless, we stand amid evil and good,	  We stand amid time beginningless and endless, we stand amid evil and good,	  We stand amid time beginningless and endless, we stand amid evil and good,
  All swings around us, there is as much darkness as light,	  All swings around us, there is as much darkness as light,	  All swings around us, there is as much darkness as light,	  All swings around us, there is as much darkness as light,
  The very sun swings itself and its system of planets around us,	  The very sun swings itself and its system of planets around us,	  The very sun swings itself and its system of planets around us,	  The very sun swings itself and its system of planets around us,
  Its sun, and its again, all swing around us.	  Its sun, and its again, all swing around us.	  Its sun, and its again, all swing around us.	  Its sun, and its again, all swing around us.
			
  As for me, (torn, stormy, amid these vehement days,)	  As for me, (torn, stormy, amid these vehement days,)	  As for me, (torn, stormy, amid these vehement days,)	  As for me, (torn, stormy, amid these vehement days,)
  I have the idea of all, and am all and believe in all,	  I have the idea of all, and am all and believe in all,	  I have the idea of all, and am all and believe in all,	  I have the idea of all, and am all and believe in all,
  I believe materialism is true and spiritualism is true, I reject no part.	  I believe materialism is true and spiritualism is true, I reject no part.	  I believe materialism is true and spiritualism is true, I reject no part.	  I believe materialism is true and spiritualism is true, I reject no part.
			
  (Have I forgotten any part? any thing in the past?	  (Have I forgotten any part? any thing in the past?	  (Have I forgotten any part? any thing in the past?	  (Have I forgotten any part? any thing in the past?
  Come to me whoever and whatever, till I give you recognition.)	  Come to me whoever and whatever, till I give you recognition.)	  Come to me whoever and whatever, till I give you recognition.)	  Come to me whoever and whatever, till I give you recognition.)
			
  I respect Assyria, China, Teutonia, and the Hebrews,	  I respect Assyria, China, Teutonia, and the Hebrews,	  I respect Assyria, China, Teutonia, and the Hebrews,	  I respect Assyria, China, Teutonia, and the Hebrews,
  I adopt each theory, myth, god, and demigod,	  I adopt each theory, myth, god, and demigod,	  I adopt each theory, myth, god, and demigod,	  I adopt each theory, myth, god, and demigod,
  I see that the old accounts, bibles, genealogies, are true, without	  I see that the old accounts, bibles, genealogies, are true, without	  I see that the old accounts, bibles, genealogies, are true, without	  I see that the old accounts, bibles, genealogies, are true, without
      exception,	      exception,	      exception,	      exception,
  I assert that all past days were what they must have been,	  I assert that all past days were what they must have been,	  I assert that all past days were what they must have been,	  I assert that all past days were what they must have been,
  And that they could no-how have been better than they were,	  And that they could no-how have been better than they were,	  And that they could no-how have been better than they were,	  And that they could no-how have been better than they were,
  And that to-day is what it must be, and that America is,	  And that to-day is what it must be, and that America is,	  And that to-day is what it must be, and that America is,	  And that to-day is what it must be, and that America is,
  And that to-day and America could no-how be better than they are.	  And that to-day and America could no-how be better than they are.	  And that to-day and America could no-how be better than they are.	  And that to-day and America could no-how be better than they are.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  In the name of these States and in your and my name, the Past,	  In the name of these States and in your and my name, the Past,	  In the name of these States and in your and my name, the Past,	  In the name of these States and in your and my name, the Past,
  And in the name of these States and in your and my name, the Present time.	  And in the name of these States and in your and my name, the Present time.	  And in the name of these States and in your and my name, the Present time.	  And in the name of these States and in your and my name, the Present time.
			
  I know that the past was great and the future will be great,	  I know that the past was great and the future will be great,	  I know that the past was great and the future will be great,	  I know that the past was great and the future will be great,
  And I know that both curiously conjoint in the present time,	  And I know that both curiously conjoint in the present time,	  And I know that both curiously conjoint in the present time,	  And I know that both curiously conjoint in the present time,
  (For the sake of him I typify, for the common average man's sake,	  (For the sake of him I typify, for the common average man's sake,	  (For the sake of him I typify, for the common average man's sake,	  (For the sake of him I typify, for the common average man's sake,
      your sake if you are he,)	      your sake if you are he,)	      your sake if you are he,)	      your sake if you are he,)
  And that where I am or you are this present day, there is the centre	  And that where I am or you are this present day, there is the centre	  And that where I am or you are this present day, there is the centre	  And that where I am or you are this present day, there is the centre
      of all days, all races,	      of all days, all races,	      of all days, all races,	      of all days, all races,
  And there is the meaning to us of all that has ever come of races	  And there is the meaning to us of all that has ever come of races	  And there is the meaning to us of all that has ever come of races	  And there is the meaning to us of all that has ever come of races
      and days, or ever will come.	      and days, or ever will come.	      and days, or ever will come.	      and days, or ever will come.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XVIII	BOOK XVIII	BOOK XVIII	BOOK XVIII
			
			
A Broadway Pageant	A Broadway Pageant	A Broadway Pageant	A Broadway Pageant
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Over the Western sea hither from Niphon come,	  Over the Western sea hither from Niphon come,	  Over the Western sea hither from Niphon come,	  Over the Western sea hither from Niphon come,
  Courteous, the swart-cheek'd two-sworded envoys,	  Courteous, the swart-cheek'd two-sworded envoys,	  Courteous, the swart-cheek'd two-sworded envoys,	  Courteous, the swart-cheek'd two-sworded envoys,
  Leaning back in their open barouches, bare-headed, impassive,	  Leaning back in their open barouches, bare-headed, impassive,	  Leaning back in their open barouches, bare-headed, impassive,	  Leaning back in their open barouches, bare-headed, impassive,
  Ride to-day through Manhattan.	  Ride to-day through Manhattan.	  Ride to-day through Manhattan.	  Ride to-day through Manhattan.
			
  Libertad! I do not know whether others behold what I behold,	  Libertad! I do not know whether others behold what I behold,	  Libertad! I do not know whether others behold what I behold,	  Libertad! I do not know whether others behold what I behold,
  In the procession along with the nobles of Niphon, the errand-bearers,	  In the procession along with the nobles of Niphon, the errand-bearers,	  In the procession along with the nobles of Niphon, the errand-bearers,	  In the procession along with the nobles of Niphon, the errand-bearers,
  Bringing up the rear, hovering above, around, or in the ranks marching,	  Bringing up the rear, hovering above, around, or in the ranks marching,	  Bringing up the rear, hovering above, around, or in the ranks marching,	  Bringing up the rear, hovering above, around, or in the ranks marching,
  But I will sing you a song of what I behold Libertad.	  But I will sing you a song of what I behold Libertad.	  But I will sing you a song of what I behold Libertad.	  But I will sing you a song of what I behold Libertad.
			
  When million-footed Manhattan unpent descends to her pavements,	  When million-footed Manhattan unpent descends to her pavements,	  When million-footed Manhattan unpent descends to her pavements,	  When million-footed Manhattan unpent descends to her pavements,
  When the thunder-cracking guns arouse me with the proud roar love,	  When the thunder-cracking guns arouse me with the proud roar love,	  When the thunder-cracking guns arouse me with the proud roar love,	  When the thunder-cracking guns arouse me with the proud roar love,
  When the round-mouth'd guns out of the smoke and smell I love	  When the round-mouth'd guns out of the smoke and smell I love	  When the round-mouth'd guns out of the smoke and smell I love	  When the round-mouth'd guns out of the smoke and smell I love
      spit their salutes,	      spit their salutes,	      spit their salutes,	      spit their salutes,
  When the fire-flashing guns have fully alerted me, and	  When the fire-flashing guns have fully alerted me, and	  When the fire-flashing guns have fully alerted me, and	  When the fire-flashing guns have fully alerted me, and
      heaven-clouds canopy my city with a delicate thin haze,	      heaven-clouds canopy my city with a delicate thin haze,	      heaven-clouds canopy my city with a delicate thin haze,	      heaven-clouds canopy my city with a delicate thin haze,
  When gorgeous the countless straight stems, the forests at the	  When gorgeous the countless straight stems, the forests at the	  When gorgeous the countless straight stems, the forests at the	  When gorgeous the countless straight stems, the forests at the
      wharves, thicken with colors,	      wharves, thicken with colors,	      wharves, thicken with colors,	      wharves, thicken with colors,
  When every ship richly drest carries her flag at the peak,	  When every ship richly drest carries her flag at the peak,	  When every ship richly drest carries her flag at the peak,	  When every ship richly drest carries her flag at the peak,
  When pennants trail and street-festoons hang from the windows,	  When pennants trail and street-festoons hang from the windows,	  When pennants trail and street-festoons hang from the windows,	  When pennants trail and street-festoons hang from the windows,
  When Broadway is entirely given up to foot-passengers and	  When Broadway is entirely given up to foot-passengers and	  When Broadway is entirely given up to foot-passengers and	  When Broadway is entirely given up to foot-passengers and
      foot-standers, when the mass is densest,	      foot-standers, when the mass is densest,	      foot-standers, when the mass is densest,	      foot-standers, when the mass is densest,
  When the facades of the houses are alive with people, when eyes	  When the facades of the houses are alive with people, when eyes	  When the facades of the houses are alive with people, when eyes	  When the facades of the houses are alive with people, when eyes
      gaze riveted tens of thousands at a time,	      gaze riveted tens of thousands at a time,	      gaze riveted tens of thousands at a time,	      gaze riveted tens of thousands at a time,
  When the guests from the islands advance, when the pageant moves	  When the guests from the islands advance, when the pageant moves	  When the guests from the islands advance, when the pageant moves	  When the guests from the islands advance, when the pageant moves
      forward visible,	      forward visible,	      forward visible,	      forward visible,
  When the summons is made, when the answer that waited thousands	  When the summons is made, when the answer that waited thousands	  When the summons is made, when the answer that waited thousands	  When the summons is made, when the answer that waited thousands
      of years answers,	      of years answers,	      of years answers,	      of years answers,
  I too arising, answering, descend to the pavements, merge with the	  I too arising, answering, descend to the pavements, merge with the	  I too arising, answering, descend to the pavements, merge with the	  I too arising, answering, descend to the pavements, merge with the
      crowd, and gaze with them.	      crowd, and gaze with them.	      crowd, and gaze with them.	      crowd, and gaze with them.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Superb-faced Manhattan!	  Superb-faced Manhattan!	  Superb-faced Manhattan!	  Superb-faced Manhattan!
  Comrade Americanos! to us, then at last the Orient comes.	  Comrade Americanos! to us, then at last the Orient comes.	  Comrade Americanos! to us, then at last the Orient comes.	  Comrade Americanos! to us, then at last the Orient comes.
  To us, my city,	  To us, my city,	  To us, my city,	  To us, my city,
  Where our tall-topt marble and iron beauties range on opposite	  Where our tall-topt marble and iron beauties range on opposite	  Where our tall-topt marble and iron beauties range on opposite	  Where our tall-topt marble and iron beauties range on opposite
      sides, to walk in the space between,	      sides, to walk in the space between,	      sides, to walk in the space between,	      sides, to walk in the space between,
  To-day our Antipodes comes.	  To-day our Antipodes comes.	  To-day our Antipodes comes.	  To-day our Antipodes comes.
			
  The Originatress comes,	  The Originatress comes,	  The Originatress comes,	  The Originatress comes,
  The nest of languages, the bequeather of poems, the race of eld,	  The nest of languages, the bequeather of poems, the race of eld,	  The nest of languages, the bequeather of poems, the race of eld,	  The nest of languages, the bequeather of poems, the race of eld,
  Florid with blood, pensive, rapt with musings, hot with passion,	  Florid with blood, pensive, rapt with musings, hot with passion,	  Florid with blood, pensive, rapt with musings, hot with passion,	  Florid with blood, pensive, rapt with musings, hot with passion,
  Sultry with perfume, with ample and flowing garments,	  Sultry with perfume, with ample and flowing garments,	  Sultry with perfume, with ample and flowing garments,	  Sultry with perfume, with ample and flowing garments,
  With sunburnt visage, with intense soul and glittering eyes,	  With sunburnt visage, with intense soul and glittering eyes,	  With sunburnt visage, with intense soul and glittering eyes,	  With sunburnt visage, with intense soul and glittering eyes,
  The race of Brahma comes.	  The race of Brahma comes.	  The race of Brahma comes.	  The race of Brahma comes.
			
  See my cantabile! these and more are flashing to us from the procession,	  See my cantabile! these and more are flashing to us from the procession,	  See my cantabile! these and more are flashing to us from the procession,	  See my cantabile! these and more are flashing to us from the procession,
  As it moves changing, a kaleidoscope divine it moves changing before us.	  As it moves changing, a kaleidoscope divine it moves changing before us.	  As it moves changing, a kaleidoscope divine it moves changing before us.	  As it moves changing, a kaleidoscope divine it moves changing before us.
			
			
  For not the envoys nor the tann'd Japanee from his island only,	  For not the envoys nor the tann'd Japanee from his island only,	  For not the envoys nor the tann'd Japanee from his island only,	  For not the envoys nor the tann'd Japanee from his island only,
  Lithe and silent the Hindoo appears, the Asiatic continent itself	  Lithe and silent the Hindoo appears, the Asiatic continent itself	  Lithe and silent the Hindoo appears, the Asiatic continent itself	  Lithe and silent the Hindoo appears, the Asiatic continent itself
      appears, the past, the dead,	      appears, the past, the dead,	      appears, the past, the dead,	      appears, the past, the dead,
  The murky night-morning of wonder and fable inscrutable,	  The murky night-morning of wonder and fable inscrutable,	  The murky night-morning of wonder and fable inscrutable,	  The murky night-morning of wonder and fable inscrutable,
  The envelop'd mysteries, the old and unknown hive-bees,	  The envelop'd mysteries, the old and unknown hive-bees,	  The envelop'd mysteries, the old and unknown hive-bees,	  The envelop'd mysteries, the old and unknown hive-bees,
  The north, the sweltering south, eastern Assyria, the Hebrews, the	  The north, the sweltering south, eastern Assyria, the Hebrews, the	  The north, the sweltering south, eastern Assyria, the Hebrews, the	  The north, the sweltering south, eastern Assyria, the Hebrews, the
      ancient of ancients,	      ancient of ancients,	      ancient of ancients,	      ancient of ancients,
  Vast desolated cities, the gliding present, all of these and more	  Vast desolated cities, the gliding present, all of these and more	  Vast desolated cities, the gliding present, all of these and more	  Vast desolated cities, the gliding present, all of these and more
      are in the pageant-procession.	      are in the pageant-procession.	      are in the pageant-procession.	      are in the pageant-procession.
			
  Geography, the world, is in it,	  Geography, the world, is in it,	  Geography, the world, is in it,	  Geography, the world, is in it,
  The Great Sea, the brood of islands, Polynesia, the coast beyond,	  The Great Sea, the brood of islands, Polynesia, the coast beyond,	  The Great Sea, the brood of islands, Polynesia, the coast beyond,	  The Great Sea, the brood of islands, Polynesia, the coast beyond,
  The coast you henceforth are facing--you Libertad! from your Western	  The coast you henceforth are facing--you Libertad! from your Western	  The coast you henceforth are facing--you Libertad! from your Western	  The coast you henceforth are facing--you Libertad! from your Western
      golden shores,	      golden shores,	      golden shores,	      golden shores,
  The countries there with their populations, the millions en-masse	  The countries there with their populations, the millions en-masse	  The countries there with their populations, the millions en-masse	  The countries there with their populations, the millions en-masse
      are curiously here,	      are curiously here,	      are curiously here,	      are curiously here,
  The swarming market-places, the temples with idols ranged along the	  The swarming market-places, the temples with idols ranged along the	  The swarming market-places, the temples with idols ranged along the	  The swarming market-places, the temples with idols ranged along the
      sides or at the end, bonze, brahmin, and llama,	      sides or at the end, bonze, brahmin, and llama,	      sides or at the end, bonze, brahmin, and llama,	      sides or at the end, bonze, brahmin, and llama,
  Mandarin, farmer, merchant, mechanic, and fisherman,	  Mandarin, farmer, merchant, mechanic, and fisherman,	  Mandarin, farmer, merchant, mechanic, and fisherman,	  Mandarin, farmer, merchant, mechanic, and fisherman,
  The singing-girl and the dancing-girl, the ecstatic persons, the	  The singing-girl and the dancing-girl, the ecstatic persons, the	  The singing-girl and the dancing-girl, the ecstatic persons, the	  The singing-girl and the dancing-girl, the ecstatic persons, the
      secluded emperors,	      secluded emperors,	      secluded emperors,	      secluded emperors,
  Confucius himself, the great poets and heroes, the warriors, the castes,	  Confucius himself, the great poets and heroes, the warriors, the castes,	  Confucius himself, the great poets and heroes, the warriors, the castes,	  Confucius himself, the great poets and heroes, the warriors, the castes,
      all,	      all,	      all,	      all,
  Trooping up, crowding from all directions, from the Altay mountains,	  Trooping up, crowding from all directions, from the Altay mountains,	  Trooping up, crowding from all directions, from the Altay mountains,	  Trooping up, crowding from all directions, from the Altay mountains,
  From Thibet, from the four winding and far-flowing rivers of China,	  From Thibet, from the four winding and far-flowing rivers of China,	  From Thibet, from the four winding and far-flowing rivers of China,	  From Thibet, from the four winding and far-flowing rivers of China,
  From the southern peninsulas and the demi-continental islands, from	  From the southern peninsulas and the demi-continental islands, from	  From the southern peninsulas and the demi-continental islands, from	  From the southern peninsulas and the demi-continental islands, from
      Malaysia,	      Malaysia,	      Malaysia,	      Malaysia,
  These and whatever belongs to them palpable show forth to me, and	  These and whatever belongs to them palpable show forth to me, and	  These and whatever belongs to them palpable show forth to me, and	  These and whatever belongs to them palpable show forth to me, and
      are seiz'd by me,	      are seiz'd by me,	      are seiz'd by me,	      are seiz'd by me,
  And I am seiz'd by them, and friendlily held by them,	  And I am seiz'd by them, and friendlily held by them,	  And I am seiz'd by them, and friendlily held by them,	  And I am seiz'd by them, and friendlily held by them,
  Till as here them all I chant, Libertad! for themselves and for you.	  Till as here them all I chant, Libertad! for themselves and for you.	  Till as here them all I chant, Libertad! for themselves and for you.	  Till as here them all I chant, Libertad! for themselves and for you.
			
  For I too raising my voice join the ranks of this pageant,	  For I too raising my voice join the ranks of this pageant,	  For I too raising my voice join the ranks of this pageant,	  For I too raising my voice join the ranks of this pageant,
  I am the chanter, I chant aloud over the pageant,	  I am the chanter, I chant aloud over the pageant,	  I am the chanter, I chant aloud over the pageant,	  I am the chanter, I chant aloud over the pageant,
  I chant the world on my Western sea,	  I chant the world on my Western sea,	  I chant the world on my Western sea,	  I chant the world on my Western sea,
  I chant copious the islands beyond, thick as stars in the sky,	  I chant copious the islands beyond, thick as stars in the sky,	  I chant copious the islands beyond, thick as stars in the sky,	  I chant copious the islands beyond, thick as stars in the sky,
  I chant the new empire grander than any before, as in a vision it	  I chant the new empire grander than any before, as in a vision it	  I chant the new empire grander than any before, as in a vision it	  I chant the new empire grander than any before, as in a vision it
      comes to me,	      comes to me,	      comes to me,	      comes to me,
  I chant America the mistress, I chant a greater supremacy,	  I chant America the mistress, I chant a greater supremacy,	  I chant America the mistress, I chant a greater supremacy,	  I chant America the mistress, I chant a greater supremacy,
  I chant projected a thousand blooming cities yet in time on those	  I chant projected a thousand blooming cities yet in time on those	  I chant projected a thousand blooming cities yet in time on those	  I chant projected a thousand blooming cities yet in time on those
      groups of sea-islands,	      groups of sea-islands,	      groups of sea-islands,	      groups of sea-islands,
  My sail-ships and steam-ships threading the archipelagoes,	  My sail-ships and steam-ships threading the archipelagoes,	  My sail-ships and steam-ships threading the archipelagoes,	  My sail-ships and steam-ships threading the archipelagoes,
  My stars and stripes fluttering in the wind,	  My stars and stripes fluttering in the wind,	  My stars and stripes fluttering in the wind,	  My stars and stripes fluttering in the wind,
  Commerce opening, the sleep of ages having done its work, races	  Commerce opening, the sleep of ages having done its work, races	  Commerce opening, the sleep of ages having done its work, races	  Commerce opening, the sleep of ages having done its work, races
      reborn, refresh'd,	      reborn, refresh'd,	      reborn, refresh'd,	      reborn, refresh'd,
  Lives, works resumed--the object I know not--but the old, the Asiatic	  Lives, works resumed--the object I know not--but the old, the Asiatic	  Lives, works resumed--the object I know not--but the old, the Asiatic	  Lives, works resumed--the object I know not--but the old, the Asiatic
      renew'd as it must be,	      renew'd as it must be,	      renew'd as it must be,	      renew'd as it must be,
  Commencing from this day surrounded by the world.	  Commencing from this day surrounded by the world.	  Commencing from this day surrounded by the world.	  Commencing from this day surrounded by the world.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  And you Libertad of the world!	  And you Libertad of the world!	  And you Libertad of the world!	  And you Libertad of the world!
  You shall sit in the middle well-pois'd thousands and thousands of years,	  You shall sit in the middle well-pois'd thousands and thousands of years,	  You shall sit in the middle well-pois'd thousands and thousands of years,	  You shall sit in the middle well-pois'd thousands and thousands of years,
  As to-day from one side the nobles of Asia come to you,	  As to-day from one side the nobles of Asia come to you,	  As to-day from one side the nobles of Asia come to you,	  As to-day from one side the nobles of Asia come to you,
  As to-morrow from the other side the queen of England sends her	  As to-morrow from the other side the queen of England sends her	  As to-morrow from the other side the queen of England sends her	  As to-morrow from the other side the queen of England sends her
      eldest son to you.	      eldest son to you.	      eldest son to you.	      eldest son to you.
			
  The sign is reversing, the orb is enclosed,	  The sign is reversing, the orb is enclosed,	  The sign is reversing, the orb is enclosed,	  The sign is reversing, the orb is enclosed,
  The ring is circled, the journey is done,	  The ring is circled, the journey is done,	  The ring is circled, the journey is done,	  The ring is circled, the journey is done,
  The box-lid is but perceptibly open'd, nevertheless the perfume	  The box-lid is but perceptibly open'd, nevertheless the perfume	  The box-lid is but perceptibly open'd, nevertheless the perfume	  The box-lid is but perceptibly open'd, nevertheless the perfume
      pours copiously out of the whole box.	      pours copiously out of the whole box.	      pours copiously out of the whole box.	      pours copiously out of the whole box.
			
  Young Libertad! with the venerable Asia, the all-mother,	  Young Libertad! with the venerable Asia, the all-mother,	  Young Libertad! with the venerable Asia, the all-mother,	  Young Libertad! with the venerable Asia, the all-mother,
  Be considerate with her now and ever hot Libertad, for you are all,	  Be considerate with her now and ever hot Libertad, for you are all,	  Be considerate with her now and ever hot Libertad, for you are all,	  Be considerate with her now and ever hot Libertad, for you are all,
  Bend your proud neck to the long-off mother now sending messages	  Bend your proud neck to the long-off mother now sending messages	  Bend your proud neck to the long-off mother now sending messages	  Bend your proud neck to the long-off mother now sending messages
      over the archipelagoes to you,	      over the archipelagoes to you,	      over the archipelagoes to you,	      over the archipelagoes to you,
  Bend your proud neck low for once, young Libertad.	  Bend your proud neck low for once, young Libertad.	  Bend your proud neck low for once, young Libertad.	  Bend your proud neck low for once, young Libertad.
			
  Here the children straying westward so long? so wide the tramping?	  Here the children straying westward so long? so wide the tramping?	  Here the children straying westward so long? so wide the tramping?	  Here the children straying westward so long? so wide the tramping?
  Were the precedent dim ages debouching westward from Paradise so long?	  Were the precedent dim ages debouching westward from Paradise so long?	  Were the precedent dim ages debouching westward from Paradise so long?	  Were the precedent dim ages debouching westward from Paradise so long?
  Were the centuries steadily footing it that way, all the while	  Were the centuries steadily footing it that way, all the while	  Were the centuries steadily footing it that way, all the while	  Were the centuries steadily footing it that way, all the while
      unknown, for you, for reasons?	      unknown, for you, for reasons?	      unknown, for you, for reasons?	      unknown, for you, for reasons?
			
  They are justified, they are accomplish'd, they shall now be turn'd	  They are justified, they are accomplish'd, they shall now be turn'd	  They are justified, they are accomplish'd, they shall now be turn'd	  They are justified, they are accomplish'd, they shall now be turn'd
      the other way also, to travel toward you thence,	      the other way also, to travel toward you thence,	      the other way also, to travel toward you thence,	      the other way also, to travel toward you thence,
  They shall now also march obediently eastward for your sake Libertad.	  They shall now also march obediently eastward for your sake Libertad.	  They shall now also march obediently eastward for your sake Libertad.	  They shall now also march obediently eastward for your sake Libertad.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XIX.  SEA-DRIFT	BOOK XIX.  SEA-DRIFT	BOOK XIX.  SEA-DRIFT	BOOK XIX.  SEA-DRIFT
			
			
Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking	Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking	Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking	Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking
			
  Out of the cradle endlessly rocking,	  Out of the cradle endlessly rocking,	  Out of the cradle endlessly rocking,	  Out of the cradle endlessly rocking,
  Out of the mocking-bird's throat, the musical shuttle,	  Out of the mocking-bird's throat, the musical shuttle,	  Out of the mocking-bird's throat, the musical shuttle,	  Out of the mocking-bird's throat, the musical shuttle,
  Out of the Ninth-month midnight,	  Out of the Ninth-month midnight,	  Out of the Ninth-month midnight,	  Out of the Ninth-month midnight,
  Over the sterile sands and the fields beyond, where the child	  Over the sterile sands and the fields beyond, where the child	  Over the sterile sands and the fields beyond, where the child	  Over the sterile sands and the fields beyond, where the child
      leaving his bed wander'd alone, bareheaded, barefoot,	      leaving his bed wander'd alone, bareheaded, barefoot,	      leaving his bed wander'd alone, bareheaded, barefoot,	      leaving his bed wander'd alone, bareheaded, barefoot,
  Down from the shower'd halo,	  Down from the shower'd halo,	  Down from the shower'd halo,	  Down from the shower'd halo,
  Up from the mystic play of shadows twining and twisting as if they	  Up from the mystic play of shadows twining and twisting as if they	  Up from the mystic play of shadows twining and twisting as if they	  Up from the mystic play of shadows twining and twisting as if they
      were alive,	      were alive,	      were alive,	      were alive,
  Out from the patches of briers and blackberries,	  Out from the patches of briers and blackberries,	  Out from the patches of briers and blackberries,	  Out from the patches of briers and blackberries,
  From the memories of the bird that chanted to me,	  From the memories of the bird that chanted to me,	  From the memories of the bird that chanted to me,	  From the memories of the bird that chanted to me,
  From your memories sad brother, from the fitful risings and fallings I heard,	  From your memories sad brother, from the fitful risings and fallings I heard,	  From your memories sad brother, from the fitful risings and fallings I heard,	  From your memories sad brother, from the fitful risings and fallings I heard,
  From under that yellow half-moon late-risen and swollen as if with tears,	  From under that yellow half-moon late-risen and swollen as if with tears,	  From under that yellow half-moon late-risen and swollen as if with tears,	  From under that yellow half-moon late-risen and swollen as if with tears,
  From those beginning notes of yearning and love there in the mist,	  From those beginning notes of yearning and love there in the mist,	  From those beginning notes of yearning and love there in the mist,	  From those beginning notes of yearning and love there in the mist,
  From the thousand responses of my heart never to cease,	  From the thousand responses of my heart never to cease,	  From the thousand responses of my heart never to cease,	  From the thousand responses of my heart never to cease,
  From the myriad thence-arous'd words,	  From the myriad thence-arous'd words,	  From the myriad thence-arous'd words,	  From the myriad thence-arous'd words,
  From the word stronger and more delicious than any,	  From the word stronger and more delicious than any,	  From the word stronger and more delicious than any,	  From the word stronger and more delicious than any,
  From such as now they start the scene revisiting,	  From such as now they start the scene revisiting,	  From such as now they start the scene revisiting,	  From such as now they start the scene revisiting,
  As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing,	  As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing,	  As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing,	  As a flock, twittering, rising, or overhead passing,
  Borne hither, ere all eludes me, hurriedly,	  Borne hither, ere all eludes me, hurriedly,	  Borne hither, ere all eludes me, hurriedly,	  Borne hither, ere all eludes me, hurriedly,
  A man, yet by these tears a little boy again,	  A man, yet by these tears a little boy again,	  A man, yet by these tears a little boy again,	  A man, yet by these tears a little boy again,
  Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves,	  Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves,	  Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves,	  Throwing myself on the sand, confronting the waves,
  I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter,	  I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter,	  I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter,	  I, chanter of pains and joys, uniter of here and hereafter,
  Taking all hints to use them, but swiftly leaping beyond them,	  Taking all hints to use them, but swiftly leaping beyond them,	  Taking all hints to use them, but swiftly leaping beyond them,	  Taking all hints to use them, but swiftly leaping beyond them,
  A reminiscence sing.	  A reminiscence sing.	  A reminiscence sing.	  A reminiscence sing.
			
  Once Paumanok,	  Once Paumanok,	  Once Paumanok,	  Once Paumanok,
  When the lilac-scent was in the air and Fifth-month grass was growing,	  When the lilac-scent was in the air and Fifth-month grass was growing,	  When the lilac-scent was in the air and Fifth-month grass was growing,	  When the lilac-scent was in the air and Fifth-month grass was growing,
  Up this seashore in some briers,	  Up this seashore in some briers,	  Up this seashore in some briers,	  Up this seashore in some briers,
  Two feather'd guests from Alabama, two together,	  Two feather'd guests from Alabama, two together,	  Two feather'd guests from Alabama, two together,	  Two feather'd guests from Alabama, two together,
  And their nest, and four light-green eggs spotted with brown,	  And their nest, and four light-green eggs spotted with brown,	  And their nest, and four light-green eggs spotted with brown,	  And their nest, and four light-green eggs spotted with brown,
  And every day the he-bird to and fro near at hand,	  And every day the he-bird to and fro near at hand,	  And every day the he-bird to and fro near at hand,	  And every day the he-bird to and fro near at hand,
  And every day the she-bird crouch'd on her nest, silent, with bright eyes,	  And every day the she-bird crouch'd on her nest, silent, with bright eyes,	  And every day the she-bird crouch'd on her nest, silent, with bright eyes,	  And every day the she-bird crouch'd on her nest, silent, with bright eyes,
  And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never disturbing	  And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never disturbing	  And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never disturbing	  And every day I, a curious boy, never too close, never disturbing
  them,	  them,	  them,	  them,
  Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating.	  Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating.	  Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating.	  Cautiously peering, absorbing, translating.
			
  Shine! shine! shine!	  Shine! shine! shine!	  Shine! shine! shine!	  Shine! shine! shine!
  Pour down your warmth, great sun.'	  Pour down your warmth, great sun.'	  Pour down your warmth, great sun.'	  Pour down your warmth, great sun.'
  While we bask, we two together.	  While we bask, we two together.	  While we bask, we two together.	  While we bask, we two together.
			
  Two together!	  Two together!	  Two together!	  Two together!
  Winds blow south, or winds blow north,	  Winds blow south, or winds blow north,	  Winds blow south, or winds blow north,	  Winds blow south, or winds blow north,
  Day come white, or night come black,	  Day come white, or night come black,	  Day come white, or night come black,	  Day come white, or night come black,
  Home, or rivers and mountains from home,	  Home, or rivers and mountains from home,	  Home, or rivers and mountains from home,	  Home, or rivers and mountains from home,
  Singing all time, minding no time,	  Singing all time, minding no time,	  Singing all time, minding no time,	  Singing all time, minding no time,
  While we two keep together.	  While we two keep together.	  While we two keep together.	  While we two keep together.
			
  Till of a sudden,	  Till of a sudden,	  Till of a sudden,	  Till of a sudden,
  May-be kill'd, unknown to her mate,	  May-be kill'd, unknown to her mate,	  May-be kill'd, unknown to her mate,	  May-be kill'd, unknown to her mate,
  One forenoon the she-bird crouch'd not on the nest,	  One forenoon the she-bird crouch'd not on the nest,	  One forenoon the she-bird crouch'd not on the nest,	  One forenoon the she-bird crouch'd not on the nest,
  Nor return'd that afternoon, nor the next,	  Nor return'd that afternoon, nor the next,	  Nor return'd that afternoon, nor the next,	  Nor return'd that afternoon, nor the next,
  Nor ever appear'd again.	  Nor ever appear'd again.	  Nor ever appear'd again.	  Nor ever appear'd again.
			
  And thenceforward all summer in the sound of the sea,	  And thenceforward all summer in the sound of the sea,	  And thenceforward all summer in the sound of the sea,	  And thenceforward all summer in the sound of the sea,
  And at night under the full of the moon in calmer weather,	  And at night under the full of the moon in calmer weather,	  And at night under the full of the moon in calmer weather,	  And at night under the full of the moon in calmer weather,
  Over the hoarse surging of the sea,	  Over the hoarse surging of the sea,	  Over the hoarse surging of the sea,	  Over the hoarse surging of the sea,
  Or flitting from brier to brier by day,	  Or flitting from brier to brier by day,	  Or flitting from brier to brier by day,	  Or flitting from brier to brier by day,
  I saw, I heard at intervals the remaining one, the he-bird,	  I saw, I heard at intervals the remaining one, the he-bird,	  I saw, I heard at intervals the remaining one, the he-bird,	  I saw, I heard at intervals the remaining one, the he-bird,
  The solitary guest from Alabama.	  The solitary guest from Alabama.	  The solitary guest from Alabama.	  The solitary guest from Alabama.
			
  Blow! blow! blow!	  Blow! blow! blow!	  Blow! blow! blow!	  Blow! blow! blow!
  Blow up sea-winds along Paumanok's shore;	  Blow up sea-winds along Paumanok's shore;	  Blow up sea-winds along Paumanok's shore;	  Blow up sea-winds along Paumanok's shore;
  I wait and I wait till you blow my mate to me.	  I wait and I wait till you blow my mate to me.	  I wait and I wait till you blow my mate to me.	  I wait and I wait till you blow my mate to me.
			
  Yes, when the stars glisten'd,	  Yes, when the stars glisten'd,	  Yes, when the stars glisten'd,	  Yes, when the stars glisten'd,
  All night long on the prong of a moss-scallop'd stake,	  All night long on the prong of a moss-scallop'd stake,	  All night long on the prong of a moss-scallop'd stake,	  All night long on the prong of a moss-scallop'd stake,
  Down almost amid the slapping waves,	  Down almost amid the slapping waves,	  Down almost amid the slapping waves,	  Down almost amid the slapping waves,
  Sat the lone singer wonderful causing tears.	  Sat the lone singer wonderful causing tears.	  Sat the lone singer wonderful causing tears.	  Sat the lone singer wonderful causing tears.
			
  He call'd on his mate,	  He call'd on his mate,	  He call'd on his mate,	  He call'd on his mate,
  He pour'd forth the meanings which I of all men know.	  He pour'd forth the meanings which I of all men know.	  He pour'd forth the meanings which I of all men know.	  He pour'd forth the meanings which I of all men know.
			
  Yes my brother I know,	  Yes my brother I know,	  Yes my brother I know,	  Yes my brother I know,
  The rest might not, but I have treasur'd every note,	  The rest might not, but I have treasur'd every note,	  The rest might not, but I have treasur'd every note,	  The rest might not, but I have treasur'd every note,
  For more than once dimly down to the beach gliding,	  For more than once dimly down to the beach gliding,	  For more than once dimly down to the beach gliding,	  For more than once dimly down to the beach gliding,
  Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with the shadows,	  Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with the shadows,	  Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with the shadows,	  Silent, avoiding the moonbeams, blending myself with the shadows,
  Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the sounds and sights	  Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the sounds and sights	  Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the sounds and sights	  Recalling now the obscure shapes, the echoes, the sounds and sights
      after their sorts,	      after their sorts,	      after their sorts,	      after their sorts,
  The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing,	  The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing,	  The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing,	  The white arms out in the breakers tirelessly tossing,
  I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair,	  I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair,	  I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair,	  I, with bare feet, a child, the wind wafting my hair,
  Listen'd long and long.	  Listen'd long and long.	  Listen'd long and long.	  Listen'd long and long.
			
  Listen'd to keep, to sing, now translating the notes,	  Listen'd to keep, to sing, now translating the notes,	  Listen'd to keep, to sing, now translating the notes,	  Listen'd to keep, to sing, now translating the notes,
  Following you my brother.	  Following you my brother.	  Following you my brother.	  Following you my brother.
			
  Soothe! soothe! soothe!	  Soothe! soothe! soothe!	  Soothe! soothe! soothe!	  Soothe! soothe! soothe!
  Close on its wave soothes the wave behind,	  Close on its wave soothes the wave behind,	  Close on its wave soothes the wave behind,	  Close on its wave soothes the wave behind,
  And again another behind embracing and lapping, every one close,	  And again another behind embracing and lapping, every one close,	  And again another behind embracing and lapping, every one close,	  And again another behind embracing and lapping, every one close,
  But my love soothes not me, not me.	  But my love soothes not me, not me.	  But my love soothes not me, not me.	  But my love soothes not me, not me.
			
  Low hangs the moon, it rose late,	  Low hangs the moon, it rose late,	  Low hangs the moon, it rose late,	  Low hangs the moon, it rose late,
  It is lagging--O I think it is heavy with love, with love.	  It is lagging--O I think it is heavy with love, with love.	  It is lagging--O I think it is heavy with love, with love.	  It is lagging--O I think it is heavy with love, with love.
			
  O madly the sea pushes upon the land,	  O madly the sea pushes upon the land,	  O madly the sea pushes upon the land,	  O madly the sea pushes upon the land,
  With love, with love.	  With love, with love.	  With love, with love.	  With love, with love.
			
  O night! do I not see my love fluttering out among the breakers?	  O night! do I not see my love fluttering out among the breakers?	  O night! do I not see my love fluttering out among the breakers?	  O night! do I not see my love fluttering out among the breakers?
  What is that little black thing I see there in the white?	  What is that little black thing I see there in the white?	  What is that little black thing I see there in the white?	  What is that little black thing I see there in the white?
			
  Loud! loud! loud!	  Loud! loud! loud!	  Loud! loud! loud!	  Loud! loud! loud!
  Loud I call to you, my love!	  Loud I call to you, my love!	  Loud I call to you, my love!	  Loud I call to you, my love!
  High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves,	  High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves,	  High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves,	  High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves,
  Surely you must know who is here, is here,	  Surely you must know who is here, is here,	  Surely you must know who is here, is here,	  Surely you must know who is here, is here,
  You must know who I am, my love.	  You must know who I am, my love.	  You must know who I am, my love.	  You must know who I am, my love.
			
  Low-hanging moon!	  Low-hanging moon!	  Low-hanging moon!	  Low-hanging moon!
  What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?	  What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?	  What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?	  What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?
  O it is the shape, the shape of my mate.'	  O it is the shape, the shape of my mate.'	  O it is the shape, the shape of my mate.'	  O it is the shape, the shape of my mate.'
  O moon do not keep her from me any longer.	  O moon do not keep her from me any longer.	  O moon do not keep her from me any longer.	  O moon do not keep her from me any longer.
			
  Land! land! O land!	  Land! land! O land!	  Land! land! O land!	  Land! land! O land!
  Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me my mate back again	  Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me my mate back again	  Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me my mate back again	  Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me my mate back again
      if you only would,	      if you only would,	      if you only would,	      if you only would,
  For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look.	  For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look.	  For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look.	  For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look.
			
  O rising stars!	  O rising stars!	  O rising stars!	  O rising stars!
  Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise with some of you.	  Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise with some of you.	  Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise with some of you.	  Perhaps the one I want so much will rise, will rise with some of you.
			
  O throat! O trembling throat!	  O throat! O trembling throat!	  O throat! O trembling throat!	  O throat! O trembling throat!
  Sound clearer through the atmosphere!	  Sound clearer through the atmosphere!	  Sound clearer through the atmosphere!	  Sound clearer through the atmosphere!
  Pierce the woods, the earth,	  Pierce the woods, the earth,	  Pierce the woods, the earth,	  Pierce the woods, the earth,
  Somewhere listening to catch you must be the one I want.	  Somewhere listening to catch you must be the one I want.	  Somewhere listening to catch you must be the one I want.	  Somewhere listening to catch you must be the one I want.
			
  Shake out carols!	  Shake out carols!	  Shake out carols!	  Shake out carols!
  Solitary here, the night's carols!	  Solitary here, the night's carols!	  Solitary here, the night's carols!	  Solitary here, the night's carols!
  Carols of lonesome love! death's carols!	  Carols of lonesome love! death's carols!	  Carols of lonesome love! death's carols!	  Carols of lonesome love! death's carols!
  Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon!	  Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon!	  Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon!	  Carols under that lagging, yellow, waning moon!
  O under that moon where she droops almost down into the sea!	  O under that moon where she droops almost down into the sea!	  O under that moon where she droops almost down into the sea!	  O under that moon where she droops almost down into the sea!
  O reckless despairing carols.	  O reckless despairing carols.	  O reckless despairing carols.	  O reckless despairing carols.
			
  But soft! sink low!	  But soft! sink low!	  But soft! sink low!	  But soft! sink low!
  Soft! let me just murmur,	  Soft! let me just murmur,	  Soft! let me just murmur,	  Soft! let me just murmur,
  And do you wait a moment you husky-nois'd sea,	  And do you wait a moment you husky-nois'd sea,	  And do you wait a moment you husky-nois'd sea,	  And do you wait a moment you husky-nois'd sea,
  For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me,	  For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me,	  For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me,	  For somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me,
  So faint, I must be still, be still to listen,	  So faint, I must be still, be still to listen,	  So faint, I must be still, be still to listen,	  So faint, I must be still, be still to listen,
  But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to me.	  But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to me.	  But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to me.	  But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to me.
			
  Hither my love!	  Hither my love!	  Hither my love!	  Hither my love!
  Here I am! here!	  Here I am! here!	  Here I am! here!	  Here I am! here!
  With this just-sustain'd note I announce myself to you,	  With this just-sustain'd note I announce myself to you,	  With this just-sustain'd note I announce myself to you,	  With this just-sustain'd note I announce myself to you,
  This gentle call is for you my love, for you.	  This gentle call is for you my love, for you.	  This gentle call is for you my love, for you.	  This gentle call is for you my love, for you.
			
  Do not be decoy'd elsewhere,	  Do not be decoy'd elsewhere,	  Do not be decoy'd elsewhere,	  Do not be decoy'd elsewhere,
  That is the whistle of the wind, it is not my voice,	  That is the whistle of the wind, it is not my voice,	  That is the whistle of the wind, it is not my voice,	  That is the whistle of the wind, it is not my voice,
  That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray,	  That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray,	  That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray,	  That is the fluttering, the fluttering of the spray,
  Those are the shadows of leaves.	  Those are the shadows of leaves.	  Those are the shadows of leaves.	  Those are the shadows of leaves.
			
  O darkness! O in vain!	  O darkness! O in vain!	  O darkness! O in vain!	  O darkness! O in vain!
  O I am very sick and sorrowful	  O I am very sick and sorrowful	  O I am very sick and sorrowful	  O I am very sick and sorrowful
			
  O brown halo in the sky near the moon, drooping upon the sea!	  O brown halo in the sky near the moon, drooping upon the sea!	  O brown halo in the sky near the moon, drooping upon the sea!	  O brown halo in the sky near the moon, drooping upon the sea!
  O troubled reflection in the sea!	  O troubled reflection in the sea!	  O troubled reflection in the sea!	  O troubled reflection in the sea!
  O throat! O throbbing heart!	  O throat! O throbbing heart!	  O throat! O throbbing heart!	  O throat! O throbbing heart!
  And I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night.	  And I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night.	  And I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night.	  And I singing uselessly, uselessly all the night.
			
  O past! O happy life! O songs of joy!	  O past! O happy life! O songs of joy!	  O past! O happy life! O songs of joy!	  O past! O happy life! O songs of joy!
  In the air, in the woods, over fields,	  In the air, in the woods, over fields,	  In the air, in the woods, over fields,	  In the air, in the woods, over fields,
  Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved!	  Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved!	  Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved!	  Loved! loved! loved! loved! loved!
  But my mate no more, no more with me!	  But my mate no more, no more with me!	  But my mate no more, no more with me!	  But my mate no more, no more with me!
  We two together no more.	  We two together no more.	  We two together no more.	  We two together no more.
			
  The aria sinking,	  The aria sinking,	  The aria sinking,	  The aria sinking,
  All else continuing, the stars shining,	  All else continuing, the stars shining,	  All else continuing, the stars shining,	  All else continuing, the stars shining,
  The winds blowing, the notes of the bird continuous echoing,	  The winds blowing, the notes of the bird continuous echoing,	  The winds blowing, the notes of the bird continuous echoing,	  The winds blowing, the notes of the bird continuous echoing,
  With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly moaning,	  With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly moaning,	  With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly moaning,	  With angry moans the fierce old mother incessantly moaning,
  On the sands of Paumanok's shore gray and rustling,	  On the sands of Paumanok's shore gray and rustling,	  On the sands of Paumanok's shore gray and rustling,	  On the sands of Paumanok's shore gray and rustling,
  The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, drooping, the face of	  The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, drooping, the face of	  The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, drooping, the face of	  The yellow half-moon enlarged, sagging down, drooping, the face of
      the sea almost touching,	      the sea almost touching,	      the sea almost touching,	      the sea almost touching,
  The boy ecstatic, with his bare feet the waves, with his hair the	  The boy ecstatic, with his bare feet the waves, with his hair the	  The boy ecstatic, with his bare feet the waves, with his hair the	  The boy ecstatic, with his bare feet the waves, with his hair the
      atmosphere dallying,	      atmosphere dallying,	      atmosphere dallying,	      atmosphere dallying,
  The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last tumultuously	  The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last tumultuously	  The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last tumultuously	  The love in the heart long pent, now loose, now at last tumultuously
      bursting,	      bursting,	      bursting,	      bursting,
  The aria's meaning, the ears, the soul, swiftly depositing,	  The aria's meaning, the ears, the soul, swiftly depositing,	  The aria's meaning, the ears, the soul, swiftly depositing,	  The aria's meaning, the ears, the soul, swiftly depositing,
  The strange tears down the cheeks coursing,	  The strange tears down the cheeks coursing,	  The strange tears down the cheeks coursing,	  The strange tears down the cheeks coursing,
  The colloquy there, the trio, each uttering,	  The colloquy there, the trio, each uttering,	  The colloquy there, the trio, each uttering,	  The colloquy there, the trio, each uttering,
  The undertone, the savage old mother incessantly crying,	  The undertone, the savage old mother incessantly crying,	  The undertone, the savage old mother incessantly crying,	  The undertone, the savage old mother incessantly crying,
  To the boy's soul's questions sullenly timing, some drown'd secret hissing,	  To the boy's soul's questions sullenly timing, some drown'd secret hissing,	  To the boy's soul's questions sullenly timing, some drown'd secret hissing,	  To the boy's soul's questions sullenly timing, some drown'd secret hissing,
  To the outsetting bard.	  To the outsetting bard.	  To the outsetting bard.	  To the outsetting bard.
			
  Demon or bird! (said the boy's soul,)	  Demon or bird! (said the boy's soul,)	  Demon or bird! (said the boy's soul,)	  Demon or bird! (said the boy's soul,)
  Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it really to me?	  Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it really to me?	  Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it really to me?	  Is it indeed toward your mate you sing? or is it really to me?
  For I, that was a child, my tongue's use sleeping, now I have heard you,	  For I, that was a child, my tongue's use sleeping, now I have heard you,	  For I, that was a child, my tongue's use sleeping, now I have heard you,	  For I, that was a child, my tongue's use sleeping, now I have heard you,
  Now in a moment I know what I am for, I awake,	  Now in a moment I know what I am for, I awake,	  Now in a moment I know what I am for, I awake,	  Now in a moment I know what I am for, I awake,
  And already a thousand singers, a thousand songs, clearer, louder	  And already a thousand singers, a thousand songs, clearer, louder	  And already a thousand singers, a thousand songs, clearer, louder	  And already a thousand singers, a thousand songs, clearer, louder
      and more sorrowful than yours,	      and more sorrowful than yours,	      and more sorrowful than yours,	      and more sorrowful than yours,
  A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within me, never to die.	  A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within me, never to die.	  A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within me, never to die.	  A thousand warbling echoes have started to life within me, never to die.
			
  O you singer solitary, singing by yourself, projecting me,	  O you singer solitary, singing by yourself, projecting me,	  O you singer solitary, singing by yourself, projecting me,	  O you singer solitary, singing by yourself, projecting me,
  O solitary me listening, never more shall I cease perpetuating you,	  O solitary me listening, never more shall I cease perpetuating you,	  O solitary me listening, never more shall I cease perpetuating you,	  O solitary me listening, never more shall I cease perpetuating you,
  Never more shall I escape, never more the reverberations,	  Never more shall I escape, never more the reverberations,	  Never more shall I escape, never more the reverberations,	  Never more shall I escape, never more the reverberations,
  Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent from me,	  Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent from me,	  Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent from me,	  Never more the cries of unsatisfied love be absent from me,
  Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was before what	  Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was before what	  Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was before what	  Never again leave me to be the peaceful child I was before what
      there in the night,	      there in the night,	      there in the night,	      there in the night,
  By the sea under the yellow and sagging moon,	  By the sea under the yellow and sagging moon,	  By the sea under the yellow and sagging moon,	  By the sea under the yellow and sagging moon,
  The messenger there arous'd, the fire, the sweet hell within,	  The messenger there arous'd, the fire, the sweet hell within,	  The messenger there arous'd, the fire, the sweet hell within,	  The messenger there arous'd, the fire, the sweet hell within,
  The unknown want, the destiny of me.	  The unknown want, the destiny of me.	  The unknown want, the destiny of me.	  The unknown want, the destiny of me.
			
  O give me the clue! (it lurks in the night here somewhere,)	  O give me the clue! (it lurks in the night here somewhere,)	  O give me the clue! (it lurks in the night here somewhere,)	  O give me the clue! (it lurks in the night here somewhere,)
  O if I am to have so much, let me have more!	  O if I am to have so much, let me have more!	  O if I am to have so much, let me have more!	  O if I am to have so much, let me have more!
			
  A word then, (for I will conquer it,)	  A word then, (for I will conquer it,)	  A word then, (for I will conquer it,)	  A word then, (for I will conquer it,)
  The word final, superior to all,	  The word final, superior to all,	  The word final, superior to all,	  The word final, superior to all,
  Subtle, sent up--what is it?--I listen;	  Subtle, sent up--what is it?--I listen;	  Subtle, sent up--what is it?--I listen;	  Subtle, sent up--what is it?--I listen;
  Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you sea-waves?	  Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you sea-waves?	  Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you sea-waves?	  Are you whispering it, and have been all the time, you sea-waves?
  Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands?	  Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands?	  Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands?	  Is that it from your liquid rims and wet sands?
			
  Whereto answering, the sea,	  Whereto answering, the sea,	  Whereto answering, the sea,	  Whereto answering, the sea,
  Delaying not, hurrying not,	  Delaying not, hurrying not,	  Delaying not, hurrying not,	  Delaying not, hurrying not,
  Whisper'd me through the night, and very plainly before daybreak,	  Whisper'd me through the night, and very plainly before daybreak,	  Whisper'd me through the night, and very plainly before daybreak,	  Whisper'd me through the night, and very plainly before daybreak,
  Lisp'd to me the low and delicious word death,	  Lisp'd to me the low and delicious word death,	  Lisp'd to me the low and delicious word death,	  Lisp'd to me the low and delicious word death,
  And again death, death, death, death	  And again death, death, death, death	  And again death, death, death, death	  And again death, death, death, death
  Hissing melodious, neither like the bird nor like my arous'd child's heart,	  Hissing melodious, neither like the bird nor like my arous'd child's heart,	  Hissing melodious, neither like the bird nor like my arous'd child's heart,	  Hissing melodious, neither like the bird nor like my arous'd child's heart,
  But edging near as privately for me rustling at my feet,	  But edging near as privately for me rustling at my feet,	  But edging near as privately for me rustling at my feet,	  But edging near as privately for me rustling at my feet,
  Creeping thence steadily up to my ears and laving me softly all over,	  Creeping thence steadily up to my ears and laving me softly all over,	  Creeping thence steadily up to my ears and laving me softly all over,	  Creeping thence steadily up to my ears and laving me softly all over,
  Death, death, death, death, death.	  Death, death, death, death, death.	  Death, death, death, death, death.	  Death, death, death, death, death.
			
  Which I do not forget.	  Which I do not forget.	  Which I do not forget.	  Which I do not forget.
  But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother,	  But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother,	  But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother,	  But fuse the song of my dusky demon and brother,
  That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok's gray beach,	  That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok's gray beach,	  That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok's gray beach,	  That he sang to me in the moonlight on Paumanok's gray beach,
  With the thousand responsive songs at random,	  With the thousand responsive songs at random,	  With the thousand responsive songs at random,	  With the thousand responsive songs at random,
  My own songs awaked from that hour,	  My own songs awaked from that hour,	  My own songs awaked from that hour,	  My own songs awaked from that hour,
  And with them the key, the word up from the waves,	  And with them the key, the word up from the waves,	  And with them the key, the word up from the waves,	  And with them the key, the word up from the waves,
  The word of the sweetest song and all songs,	  The word of the sweetest song and all songs,	  The word of the sweetest song and all songs,	  The word of the sweetest song and all songs,
  That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my feet,	  That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my feet,	  That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my feet,	  That strong and delicious word which, creeping to my feet,
  (Or like some old crone rocking the cradle, swathed in sweet	  (Or like some old crone rocking the cradle, swathed in sweet	  (Or like some old crone rocking the cradle, swathed in sweet	  (Or like some old crone rocking the cradle, swathed in sweet
      garments, bending aside,)	      garments, bending aside,)	      garments, bending aside,)	      garments, bending aside,)
  The sea whisper'd me.	  The sea whisper'd me.	  The sea whisper'd me.	  The sea whisper'd me.
			
			
			
			
As I Ebb'd with the Ocean of Life	As I Ebb'd with the Ocean of Life	As I Ebb'd with the Ocean of Life	As I Ebb'd with the Ocean of Life
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  As I ebb'd with the ocean of life,	  As I ebb'd with the ocean of life,	  As I ebb'd with the ocean of life,	  As I ebb'd with the ocean of life,
  As I wended the shores I know,	  As I wended the shores I know,	  As I wended the shores I know,	  As I wended the shores I know,
  As I walk'd where the ripples continually wash you Paumanok,	  As I walk'd where the ripples continually wash you Paumanok,	  As I walk'd where the ripples continually wash you Paumanok,	  As I walk'd where the ripples continually wash you Paumanok,
  Where they rustle up hoarse and sibilant,	  Where they rustle up hoarse and sibilant,	  Where they rustle up hoarse and sibilant,	  Where they rustle up hoarse and sibilant,
  Where the fierce old mother endlessly cries for her castaways,	  Where the fierce old mother endlessly cries for her castaways,	  Where the fierce old mother endlessly cries for her castaways,	  Where the fierce old mother endlessly cries for her castaways,
  I musing late in the autumn day, gazing off southward,	  I musing late in the autumn day, gazing off southward,	  I musing late in the autumn day, gazing off southward,	  I musing late in the autumn day, gazing off southward,
  Held by this electric self out of the pride of which I utter poems,	  Held by this electric self out of the pride of which I utter poems,	  Held by this electric self out of the pride of which I utter poems,	  Held by this electric self out of the pride of which I utter poems,
  Was seiz'd by the spirit that trails in the lines underfoot,	  Was seiz'd by the spirit that trails in the lines underfoot,	  Was seiz'd by the spirit that trails in the lines underfoot,	  Was seiz'd by the spirit that trails in the lines underfoot,
  The rim, the sediment that stands for all the water and all the land	  The rim, the sediment that stands for all the water and all the land	  The rim, the sediment that stands for all the water and all the land	  The rim, the sediment that stands for all the water and all the land
      of the globe.	      of the globe.	      of the globe.	      of the globe.
			
  Fascinated, my eyes reverting from the south, dropt, to follow those	  Fascinated, my eyes reverting from the south, dropt, to follow those	  Fascinated, my eyes reverting from the south, dropt, to follow those	  Fascinated, my eyes reverting from the south, dropt, to follow those
      slender windrows,	      slender windrows,	      slender windrows,	      slender windrows,
  Chaff, straw, splinters of wood, weeds, and the sea-gluten,	  Chaff, straw, splinters of wood, weeds, and the sea-gluten,	  Chaff, straw, splinters of wood, weeds, and the sea-gluten,	  Chaff, straw, splinters of wood, weeds, and the sea-gluten,
  Scum, scales from shining rocks, leaves of salt-lettuce, left by the tide,	  Scum, scales from shining rocks, leaves of salt-lettuce, left by the tide,	  Scum, scales from shining rocks, leaves of salt-lettuce, left by the tide,	  Scum, scales from shining rocks, leaves of salt-lettuce, left by the tide,
  Miles walking, the sound of breaking waves the other side of me,	  Miles walking, the sound of breaking waves the other side of me,	  Miles walking, the sound of breaking waves the other side of me,	  Miles walking, the sound of breaking waves the other side of me,
  Paumanok there and then as I thought the old thought of likenesses,	  Paumanok there and then as I thought the old thought of likenesses,	  Paumanok there and then as I thought the old thought of likenesses,	  Paumanok there and then as I thought the old thought of likenesses,
  These you presented to me you fish-shaped island,	  These you presented to me you fish-shaped island,	  These you presented to me you fish-shaped island,	  These you presented to me you fish-shaped island,
  As I wended the shores I know,	  As I wended the shores I know,	  As I wended the shores I know,	  As I wended the shores I know,
  As I walk'd with that electric self seeking types.	  As I walk'd with that electric self seeking types.	  As I walk'd with that electric self seeking types.	  As I walk'd with that electric self seeking types.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  As I wend to the shores I know not,	  As I wend to the shores I know not,	  As I wend to the shores I know not,	  As I wend to the shores I know not,
  As I list to the dirge, the voices of men and women wreck'd,	  As I list to the dirge, the voices of men and women wreck'd,	  As I list to the dirge, the voices of men and women wreck'd,	  As I list to the dirge, the voices of men and women wreck'd,
  As I inhale the impalpable breezes that set in upon me,	  As I inhale the impalpable breezes that set in upon me,	  As I inhale the impalpable breezes that set in upon me,	  As I inhale the impalpable breezes that set in upon me,
  As the ocean so mysterious rolls toward me closer and closer,	  As the ocean so mysterious rolls toward me closer and closer,	  As the ocean so mysterious rolls toward me closer and closer,	  As the ocean so mysterious rolls toward me closer and closer,
  I too but signify at the utmost a little wash'd-up drift,	  I too but signify at the utmost a little wash'd-up drift,	  I too but signify at the utmost a little wash'd-up drift,	  I too but signify at the utmost a little wash'd-up drift,
  A few sands and dead leaves to gather,	  A few sands and dead leaves to gather,	  A few sands and dead leaves to gather,	  A few sands and dead leaves to gather,
  Gather, and merge myself as part of the sands and drift.	  Gather, and merge myself as part of the sands and drift.	  Gather, and merge myself as part of the sands and drift.	  Gather, and merge myself as part of the sands and drift.
			
  O baffled, balk'd, bent to the very earth,	  O baffled, balk'd, bent to the very earth,	  O baffled, balk'd, bent to the very earth,	  O baffled, balk'd, bent to the very earth,
  Oppress'd with myself that I have dared to open my mouth,	  Oppress'd with myself that I have dared to open my mouth,	  Oppress'd with myself that I have dared to open my mouth,	  Oppress'd with myself that I have dared to open my mouth,
  Aware now that amid all that blab whose echoes recoil upon me I have	  Aware now that amid all that blab whose echoes recoil upon me I have	  Aware now that amid all that blab whose echoes recoil upon me I have	  Aware now that amid all that blab whose echoes recoil upon me I have
      not once had the least idea who or what I am,	      not once had the least idea who or what I am,	      not once had the least idea who or what I am,	      not once had the least idea who or what I am,
  But that before all my arrogant poems the real Me stands yet	  But that before all my arrogant poems the real Me stands yet	  But that before all my arrogant poems the real Me stands yet	  But that before all my arrogant poems the real Me stands yet
      untouch'd, untold, altogether unreach'd,	      untouch'd, untold, altogether unreach'd,	      untouch'd, untold, altogether unreach'd,	      untouch'd, untold, altogether unreach'd,
  Withdrawn far, mocking me with mock-congratulatory signs and bows,	  Withdrawn far, mocking me with mock-congratulatory signs and bows,	  Withdrawn far, mocking me with mock-congratulatory signs and bows,	  Withdrawn far, mocking me with mock-congratulatory signs and bows,
  With peals of distant ironical laughter at every word I have written,	  With peals of distant ironical laughter at every word I have written,	  With peals of distant ironical laughter at every word I have written,	  With peals of distant ironical laughter at every word I have written,
  Pointing in silence to these songs, and then to the sand beneath.	  Pointing in silence to these songs, and then to the sand beneath.	  Pointing in silence to these songs, and then to the sand beneath.	  Pointing in silence to these songs, and then to the sand beneath.
			
  I perceive I have not really understood any thing, not a single	  I perceive I have not really understood any thing, not a single	  I perceive I have not really understood any thing, not a single	  I perceive I have not really understood any thing, not a single
      object, and that no man ever can,	      object, and that no man ever can,	      object, and that no man ever can,	      object, and that no man ever can,
  Nature here in sight of the sea taking advantage of me to dart upon	  Nature here in sight of the sea taking advantage of me to dart upon	  Nature here in sight of the sea taking advantage of me to dart upon	  Nature here in sight of the sea taking advantage of me to dart upon
      me and sting me,	      me and sting me,	      me and sting me,	      me and sting me,
  Because I have dared to open my mouth to sing at all.	  Because I have dared to open my mouth to sing at all.	  Because I have dared to open my mouth to sing at all.	  Because I have dared to open my mouth to sing at all.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  You oceans both, I close with you,	  You oceans both, I close with you,	  You oceans both, I close with you,	  You oceans both, I close with you,
  We murmur alike reproachfully rolling sands and drift, knowing not why,	  We murmur alike reproachfully rolling sands and drift, knowing not why,	  We murmur alike reproachfully rolling sands and drift, knowing not why,	  We murmur alike reproachfully rolling sands and drift, knowing not why,
  These little shreds indeed standing for you and me and all.	  These little shreds indeed standing for you and me and all.	  These little shreds indeed standing for you and me and all.	  These little shreds indeed standing for you and me and all.
			
  You friable shore with trails of debris,	  You friable shore with trails of debris,	  You friable shore with trails of debris,	  You friable shore with trails of debris,
  You fish-shaped island, I take what is underfoot,	  You fish-shaped island, I take what is underfoot,	  You fish-shaped island, I take what is underfoot,	  You fish-shaped island, I take what is underfoot,
  What is yours is mine my father.	  What is yours is mine my father.	  What is yours is mine my father.	  What is yours is mine my father.
			
  I too Paumanok,	  I too Paumanok,	  I too Paumanok,	  I too Paumanok,
  I too have bubbled up, floated the measureless float, and been	  I too have bubbled up, floated the measureless float, and been	  I too have bubbled up, floated the measureless float, and been	  I too have bubbled up, floated the measureless float, and been
      wash'd on your shores,	      wash'd on your shores,	      wash'd on your shores,	      wash'd on your shores,
  I too am but a trail of drift and debris,	  I too am but a trail of drift and debris,	  I too am but a trail of drift and debris,	  I too am but a trail of drift and debris,
  I too leave little wrecks upon you, you fish-shaped island.	  I too leave little wrecks upon you, you fish-shaped island.	  I too leave little wrecks upon you, you fish-shaped island.	  I too leave little wrecks upon you, you fish-shaped island.
			
  I throw myself upon your breast my father,	  I throw myself upon your breast my father,	  I throw myself upon your breast my father,	  I throw myself upon your breast my father,
  I cling to you so that you cannot unloose me,	  I cling to you so that you cannot unloose me,	  I cling to you so that you cannot unloose me,	  I cling to you so that you cannot unloose me,
  I hold you so firm till you answer me something.	  I hold you so firm till you answer me something.	  I hold you so firm till you answer me something.	  I hold you so firm till you answer me something.
			
  Kiss me my father,	  Kiss me my father,	  Kiss me my father,	  Kiss me my father,
  Touch me with your lips as I touch those I love,	  Touch me with your lips as I touch those I love,	  Touch me with your lips as I touch those I love,	  Touch me with your lips as I touch those I love,
  Breathe to me while I hold you close the secret of the murmuring I envy.	  Breathe to me while I hold you close the secret of the murmuring I envy.	  Breathe to me while I hold you close the secret of the murmuring I envy.	  Breathe to me while I hold you close the secret of the murmuring I envy.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Ebb, ocean of life, (the flow will return,)	  Ebb, ocean of life, (the flow will return,)	  Ebb, ocean of life, (the flow will return,)	  Ebb, ocean of life, (the flow will return,)
  Cease not your moaning you fierce old mother,	  Cease not your moaning you fierce old mother,	  Cease not your moaning you fierce old mother,	  Cease not your moaning you fierce old mother,
  Endlessly cry for your castaways, but fear not, deny not me,	  Endlessly cry for your castaways, but fear not, deny not me,	  Endlessly cry for your castaways, but fear not, deny not me,	  Endlessly cry for your castaways, but fear not, deny not me,
  Rustle not up so hoarse and angry against my feet as I touch you or	  Rustle not up so hoarse and angry against my feet as I touch you or	  Rustle not up so hoarse and angry against my feet as I touch you or	  Rustle not up so hoarse and angry against my feet as I touch you or
      gather from you.	      gather from you.	      gather from you.	      gather from you.
			
  I mean tenderly by you and all,	  I mean tenderly by you and all,	  I mean tenderly by you and all,	  I mean tenderly by you and all,
  I gather for myself and for this phantom looking down where we lead,	  I gather for myself and for this phantom looking down where we lead,	  I gather for myself and for this phantom looking down where we lead,	  I gather for myself and for this phantom looking down where we lead,
      and following me and mine.	      and following me and mine.	      and following me and mine.	      and following me and mine.
			
  Me and mine, loose windrows, little corpses,	  Me and mine, loose windrows, little corpses,	  Me and mine, loose windrows, little corpses,	  Me and mine, loose windrows, little corpses,
  Froth, snowy white, and bubbles,	  Froth, snowy white, and bubbles,	  Froth, snowy white, and bubbles,	  Froth, snowy white, and bubbles,
  (See, from my dead lips the ooze exuding at last,	  (See, from my dead lips the ooze exuding at last,	  (See, from my dead lips the ooze exuding at last,	  (See, from my dead lips the ooze exuding at last,
  See, the prismatic colors glistening and rolling,)	  See, the prismatic colors glistening and rolling,)	  See, the prismatic colors glistening and rolling,)	  See, the prismatic colors glistening and rolling,)
  Tufts of straw, sands, fragments,	  Tufts of straw, sands, fragments,	  Tufts of straw, sands, fragments,	  Tufts of straw, sands, fragments,
  Buoy'd hither from many moods, one contradicting another,	  Buoy'd hither from many moods, one contradicting another,	  Buoy'd hither from many moods, one contradicting another,	  Buoy'd hither from many moods, one contradicting another,
  From the storm, the long calm, the darkness, the swell,	  From the storm, the long calm, the darkness, the swell,	  From the storm, the long calm, the darkness, the swell,	  From the storm, the long calm, the darkness, the swell,
  Musing, pondering, a breath, a briny tear, a dab of liquid or soil,	  Musing, pondering, a breath, a briny tear, a dab of liquid or soil,	  Musing, pondering, a breath, a briny tear, a dab of liquid or soil,	  Musing, pondering, a breath, a briny tear, a dab of liquid or soil,
  Up just as much out of fathomless workings fermented and thrown,	  Up just as much out of fathomless workings fermented and thrown,	  Up just as much out of fathomless workings fermented and thrown,	  Up just as much out of fathomless workings fermented and thrown,
  A limp blossom or two, torn, just as much over waves floating,	  A limp blossom or two, torn, just as much over waves floating,	  A limp blossom or two, torn, just as much over waves floating,	  A limp blossom or two, torn, just as much over waves floating,
      drifted at random,	      drifted at random,	      drifted at random,	      drifted at random,
  Just as much for us that sobbing dirge of Nature,	  Just as much for us that sobbing dirge of Nature,	  Just as much for us that sobbing dirge of Nature,	  Just as much for us that sobbing dirge of Nature,
  Just as much whence we come that blare of the cloud-trumpets,	  Just as much whence we come that blare of the cloud-trumpets,	  Just as much whence we come that blare of the cloud-trumpets,	  Just as much whence we come that blare of the cloud-trumpets,
  We, capricious, brought hither we know not whence, spread out before you,	  We, capricious, brought hither we know not whence, spread out before you,	  We, capricious, brought hither we know not whence, spread out before you,	  We, capricious, brought hither we know not whence, spread out before you,
  You up there walking or sitting,	  You up there walking or sitting,	  You up there walking or sitting,	  You up there walking or sitting,
  Whoever you are, we too lie in drifts at your feet.	  Whoever you are, we too lie in drifts at your feet.	  Whoever you are, we too lie in drifts at your feet.	  Whoever you are, we too lie in drifts at your feet.
			
			
			
			
Tears	Tears	Tears	Tears
			
  Tears! tears! tears!	  Tears! tears! tears!	  Tears! tears! tears!	  Tears! tears! tears!
  In the night, in solitude, tears,	  In the night, in solitude, tears,	  In the night, in solitude, tears,	  In the night, in solitude, tears,
  On the white shore dripping, dripping, suck'd in by the sand,	  On the white shore dripping, dripping, suck'd in by the sand,	  On the white shore dripping, dripping, suck'd in by the sand,	  On the white shore dripping, dripping, suck'd in by the sand,
  Tears, not a star shining, all dark and desolate,	  Tears, not a star shining, all dark and desolate,	  Tears, not a star shining, all dark and desolate,	  Tears, not a star shining, all dark and desolate,
  Moist tears from the eyes of a muffled head;	  Moist tears from the eyes of a muffled head;	  Moist tears from the eyes of a muffled head;	  Moist tears from the eyes of a muffled head;
  O who is that ghost? that form in the dark, with tears?	  O who is that ghost? that form in the dark, with tears?	  O who is that ghost? that form in the dark, with tears?	  O who is that ghost? that form in the dark, with tears?
  What shapeless lump is that, bent, crouch'd there on the sand?	  What shapeless lump is that, bent, crouch'd there on the sand?	  What shapeless lump is that, bent, crouch'd there on the sand?	  What shapeless lump is that, bent, crouch'd there on the sand?
  Streaming tears, sobbing tears, throes, choked with wild cries;	  Streaming tears, sobbing tears, throes, choked with wild cries;	  Streaming tears, sobbing tears, throes, choked with wild cries;	  Streaming tears, sobbing tears, throes, choked with wild cries;
  O storm, embodied, rising, careering with swift steps along the beach!	  O storm, embodied, rising, careering with swift steps along the beach!	  O storm, embodied, rising, careering with swift steps along the beach!	  O storm, embodied, rising, careering with swift steps along the beach!
  O wild and dismal night storm, with wind--O belching and desperate!	  O wild and dismal night storm, with wind--O belching and desperate!	  O wild and dismal night storm, with wind--O belching and desperate!	  O wild and dismal night storm, with wind--O belching and desperate!
  O shade so sedate and decorous by day, with calm countenance and	  O shade so sedate and decorous by day, with calm countenance and	  O shade so sedate and decorous by day, with calm countenance and	  O shade so sedate and decorous by day, with calm countenance and
      regulated pace,	      regulated pace,	      regulated pace,	      regulated pace,
  But away at night as you fly, none looking--O then the unloosen'd ocean,	  But away at night as you fly, none looking--O then the unloosen'd ocean,	  But away at night as you fly, none looking--O then the unloosen'd ocean,	  But away at night as you fly, none looking--O then the unloosen'd ocean,
  Of tears! tears! tears!	  Of tears! tears! tears!	  Of tears! tears! tears!	  Of tears! tears! tears!
			
			
			
			
To the Man-of-War-Bird	To the Man-of-War-Bird	To the Man-of-War-Bird	To the Man-of-War-Bird
			
  Thou who hast slept all night upon the storm,	  Thou who hast slept all night upon the storm,	  Thou who hast slept all night upon the storm,	  Thou who hast slept all night upon the storm,
  Waking renew'd on thy prodigious pinions,	  Waking renew'd on thy prodigious pinions,	  Waking renew'd on thy prodigious pinions,	  Waking renew'd on thy prodigious pinions,
  (Burst the wild storm? above it thou ascended'st,	  (Burst the wild storm? above it thou ascended'st,	  (Burst the wild storm? above it thou ascended'st,	  (Burst the wild storm? above it thou ascended'st,
  And rested on the sky, thy slave that cradled thee,)	  And rested on the sky, thy slave that cradled thee,)	  And rested on the sky, thy slave that cradled thee,)	  And rested on the sky, thy slave that cradled thee,)
  Now a blue point, far, far in heaven floating,	  Now a blue point, far, far in heaven floating,	  Now a blue point, far, far in heaven floating,	  Now a blue point, far, far in heaven floating,
  As to the light emerging here on deck I watch thee,	  As to the light emerging here on deck I watch thee,	  As to the light emerging here on deck I watch thee,	  As to the light emerging here on deck I watch thee,
  (Myself a speck, a point on the world's floating vast.)	  (Myself a speck, a point on the world's floating vast.)	  (Myself a speck, a point on the world's floating vast.)	  (Myself a speck, a point on the world's floating vast.)
			
  Far, far at sea,	  Far, far at sea,	  Far, far at sea,	  Far, far at sea,
  After the night's fierce drifts have strewn the shore with wrecks,	  After the night's fierce drifts have strewn the shore with wrecks,	  After the night's fierce drifts have strewn the shore with wrecks,	  After the night's fierce drifts have strewn the shore with wrecks,
  With re-appearing day as now so happy and serene,	  With re-appearing day as now so happy and serene,	  With re-appearing day as now so happy and serene,	  With re-appearing day as now so happy and serene,
  The rosy and elastic dawn, the flashing sun,	  The rosy and elastic dawn, the flashing sun,	  The rosy and elastic dawn, the flashing sun,	  The rosy and elastic dawn, the flashing sun,
  The limpid spread of air cerulean,	  The limpid spread of air cerulean,	  The limpid spread of air cerulean,	  The limpid spread of air cerulean,
  Thou also re-appearest.	  Thou also re-appearest.	  Thou also re-appearest.	  Thou also re-appearest.
			
  Thou born to match the gale, (thou art all wings,)	  Thou born to match the gale, (thou art all wings,)	  Thou born to match the gale, (thou art all wings,)	  Thou born to match the gale, (thou art all wings,)
  To cope with heaven and earth and sea and hurricane,	  To cope with heaven and earth and sea and hurricane,	  To cope with heaven and earth and sea and hurricane,	  To cope with heaven and earth and sea and hurricane,
  Thou ship of air that never furl'st thy sails,	  Thou ship of air that never furl'st thy sails,	  Thou ship of air that never furl'st thy sails,	  Thou ship of air that never furl'st thy sails,
  Days, even weeks untired and onward, through spaces, realms gyrating,	  Days, even weeks untired and onward, through spaces, realms gyrating,	  Days, even weeks untired and onward, through spaces, realms gyrating,	  Days, even weeks untired and onward, through spaces, realms gyrating,
  At dusk that lookist on Senegal, at morn America,	  At dusk that lookist on Senegal, at morn America,	  At dusk that lookist on Senegal, at morn America,	  At dusk that lookist on Senegal, at morn America,
  That sport'st amid the lightning-flash and thunder-cloud,	  That sport'st amid the lightning-flash and thunder-cloud,	  That sport'st amid the lightning-flash and thunder-cloud,	  That sport'st amid the lightning-flash and thunder-cloud,
  In them, in thy experiences, had'st thou my soul,	  In them, in thy experiences, had'st thou my soul,	  In them, in thy experiences, had'st thou my soul,	  In them, in thy experiences, had'st thou my soul,
  What joys! what joys were thine!	  What joys! what joys were thine!	  What joys! what joys were thine!	  What joys! what joys were thine!
			
			
			
			
Aboard at a Ship's Helm	Aboard at a Ship's Helm	Aboard at a Ship's Helm	Aboard at a Ship's Helm
			
  Aboard at a ship's helm,	  Aboard at a ship's helm,	  Aboard at a ship's helm,	  Aboard at a ship's helm,
  A young steersman steering with care.	  A young steersman steering with care.	  A young steersman steering with care.	  A young steersman steering with care.
			
  Through fog on a sea-coast dolefully ringing,	  Through fog on a sea-coast dolefully ringing,	  Through fog on a sea-coast dolefully ringing,	  Through fog on a sea-coast dolefully ringing,
  An ocean-bell--O a warning bell, rock'd by the waves.	  An ocean-bell--O a warning bell, rock'd by the waves.	  An ocean-bell--O a warning bell, rock'd by the waves.	  An ocean-bell--O a warning bell, rock'd by the waves.
			
  O you give good notice indeed, you bell by the sea-reefs ringing,	  O you give good notice indeed, you bell by the sea-reefs ringing,	  O you give good notice indeed, you bell by the sea-reefs ringing,	  O you give good notice indeed, you bell by the sea-reefs ringing,
  Ringing, ringing, to warn the ship from its wreck-place.	  Ringing, ringing, to warn the ship from its wreck-place.	  Ringing, ringing, to warn the ship from its wreck-place.	  Ringing, ringing, to warn the ship from its wreck-place.
			
  For as on the alert O steersman, you mind the loud admonition,	  For as on the alert O steersman, you mind the loud admonition,	  For as on the alert O steersman, you mind the loud admonition,	  For as on the alert O steersman, you mind the loud admonition,
  The bows turn, the freighted ship tacking speeds away under her gray sails,	  The bows turn, the freighted ship tacking speeds away under her gray sails,	  The bows turn, the freighted ship tacking speeds away under her gray sails,	  The bows turn, the freighted ship tacking speeds away under her gray sails,
  The beautiful and noble ship with all her precious wealth speeds	  The beautiful and noble ship with all her precious wealth speeds	  The beautiful and noble ship with all her precious wealth speeds	  The beautiful and noble ship with all her precious wealth speeds
      away gayly and safe.	      away gayly and safe.	      away gayly and safe.	      away gayly and safe.
			
  But O the ship, the immortal ship! O ship aboard the ship!	  But O the ship, the immortal ship! O ship aboard the ship!	  But O the ship, the immortal ship! O ship aboard the ship!	  But O the ship, the immortal ship! O ship aboard the ship!
  Ship of the body, ship of the soul, voyaging, voyaging, voyaging.	  Ship of the body, ship of the soul, voyaging, voyaging, voyaging.	  Ship of the body, ship of the soul, voyaging, voyaging, voyaging.	  Ship of the body, ship of the soul, voyaging, voyaging, voyaging.
			
			
			
			
On the Beach at Night	On the Beach at Night	On the Beach at Night	On the Beach at Night
			
  On the beach at night,	  On the beach at night,	  On the beach at night,	  On the beach at night,
  Stands a child with her father,	  Stands a child with her father,	  Stands a child with her father,	  Stands a child with her father,
  Watching the east, the autumn sky.	  Watching the east, the autumn sky.	  Watching the east, the autumn sky.	  Watching the east, the autumn sky.
			
  Up through the darkness,	  Up through the darkness,	  Up through the darkness,	  Up through the darkness,
  While ravening clouds, the burial clouds, in black masses spreading,	  While ravening clouds, the burial clouds, in black masses spreading,	  While ravening clouds, the burial clouds, in black masses spreading,	  While ravening clouds, the burial clouds, in black masses spreading,
  Lower sullen and fast athwart and down the sky,	  Lower sullen and fast athwart and down the sky,	  Lower sullen and fast athwart and down the sky,	  Lower sullen and fast athwart and down the sky,
  Amid a transparent clear belt of ether yet left in the east,	  Amid a transparent clear belt of ether yet left in the east,	  Amid a transparent clear belt of ether yet left in the east,	  Amid a transparent clear belt of ether yet left in the east,
  Ascends large and calm the lord-star Jupiter,	  Ascends large and calm the lord-star Jupiter,	  Ascends large and calm the lord-star Jupiter,	  Ascends large and calm the lord-star Jupiter,
  And nigh at hand, only a very little above,	  And nigh at hand, only a very little above,	  And nigh at hand, only a very little above,	  And nigh at hand, only a very little above,
  Swim the delicate sisters the Pleiades.	  Swim the delicate sisters the Pleiades.	  Swim the delicate sisters the Pleiades.	  Swim the delicate sisters the Pleiades.
			
  From the beach the child holding the hand of her father,	  From the beach the child holding the hand of her father,	  From the beach the child holding the hand of her father,	  From the beach the child holding the hand of her father,
  Those burial-clouds that lower victorious soon to devour all,	  Those burial-clouds that lower victorious soon to devour all,	  Those burial-clouds that lower victorious soon to devour all,	  Those burial-clouds that lower victorious soon to devour all,
  Watching, silently weeps.	  Watching, silently weeps.	  Watching, silently weeps.	  Watching, silently weeps.
			
  Weep not, child,	  Weep not, child,	  Weep not, child,	  Weep not, child,
  Weep not, my darling,	  Weep not, my darling,	  Weep not, my darling,	  Weep not, my darling,
  With these kisses let me remove your tears,	  With these kisses let me remove your tears,	  With these kisses let me remove your tears,	  With these kisses let me remove your tears,
  The ravening clouds shall not long be victorious,	  The ravening clouds shall not long be victorious,	  The ravening clouds shall not long be victorious,	  The ravening clouds shall not long be victorious,
  They shall not long possess the sky, they devour the stars only in	  They shall not long possess the sky, they devour the stars only in	  They shall not long possess the sky, they devour the stars only in	  They shall not long possess the sky, they devour the stars only in
      apparition,	      apparition,	      apparition,	      apparition,
  Jupiter shall emerge, be patient, watch again another night, the	  Jupiter shall emerge, be patient, watch again another night, the	  Jupiter shall emerge, be patient, watch again another night, the	  Jupiter shall emerge, be patient, watch again another night, the
      Pleiades shall emerge,	      Pleiades shall emerge,	      Pleiades shall emerge,	      Pleiades shall emerge,
  They are immortal, all those stars both silvery and golden shall	  They are immortal, all those stars both silvery and golden shall	  They are immortal, all those stars both silvery and golden shall	  They are immortal, all those stars both silvery and golden shall
      shine out again,	      shine out again,	      shine out again,	      shine out again,
  The great stars and the little ones shall shine out again, they endure,	  The great stars and the little ones shall shine out again, they endure,	  The great stars and the little ones shall shine out again, they endure,	  The great stars and the little ones shall shine out again, they endure,
  The vast immortal suns and the long-enduring pensive moons shall	  The vast immortal suns and the long-enduring pensive moons shall	  The vast immortal suns and the long-enduring pensive moons shall	  The vast immortal suns and the long-enduring pensive moons shall
      again shine.	      again shine.	      again shine.	      again shine.
			
  Then dearest child mournest thou only for jupiter?	  Then dearest child mournest thou only for jupiter?	  Then dearest child mournest thou only for jupiter?	  Then dearest child mournest thou only for jupiter?
  Considerest thou alone the burial of the stars?	  Considerest thou alone the burial of the stars?	  Considerest thou alone the burial of the stars?	  Considerest thou alone the burial of the stars?
			
  Something there is,	  Something there is,	  Something there is,	  Something there is,
  (With my lips soothing thee, adding I whisper,	  (With my lips soothing thee, adding I whisper,	  (With my lips soothing thee, adding I whisper,	  (With my lips soothing thee, adding I whisper,
  I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and indirection,)	  I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and indirection,)	  I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and indirection,)	  I give thee the first suggestion, the problem and indirection,)
  Something there is more immortal even than the stars,	  Something there is more immortal even than the stars,	  Something there is more immortal even than the stars,	  Something there is more immortal even than the stars,
  (Many the burials, many the days and nights, passing away,)	  (Many the burials, many the days and nights, passing away,)	  (Many the burials, many the days and nights, passing away,)	  (Many the burials, many the days and nights, passing away,)
  Something that shall endure longer even than lustrous Jupiter	  Something that shall endure longer even than lustrous Jupiter	  Something that shall endure longer even than lustrous Jupiter	  Something that shall endure longer even than lustrous Jupiter
  Longer than sun or any revolving satellite,	  Longer than sun or any revolving satellite,	  Longer than sun or any revolving satellite,	  Longer than sun or any revolving satellite,
  Or the radiant sisters the Pleiades.	  Or the radiant sisters the Pleiades.	  Or the radiant sisters the Pleiades.	  Or the radiant sisters the Pleiades.
			
			
			
			
The World below the Brine	The World below the Brine	The World below the Brine	The World below the Brine
			
  The world below the brine,	  The world below the brine,	  The world below the brine,	  The world below the brine,
  Forests at the bottom of the sea, the branches and leaves,	  Forests at the bottom of the sea, the branches and leaves,	  Forests at the bottom of the sea, the branches and leaves,	  Forests at the bottom of the sea, the branches and leaves,
  Sea-lettuce, vast lichens, strange flowers and seeds, the thick	  Sea-lettuce, vast lichens, strange flowers and seeds, the thick	  Sea-lettuce, vast lichens, strange flowers and seeds, the thick	  Sea-lettuce, vast lichens, strange flowers and seeds, the thick
      tangle openings, and pink turf,	      tangle openings, and pink turf,	      tangle openings, and pink turf,	      tangle openings, and pink turf,
  Different colors, pale gray and green, purple, white, and gold, the	  Different colors, pale gray and green, purple, white, and gold, the	  Different colors, pale gray and green, purple, white, and gold, the	  Different colors, pale gray and green, purple, white, and gold, the
      play of light through the water,	      play of light through the water,	      play of light through the water,	      play of light through the water,
  Dumb swimmers there among the rocks, coral, gluten, grass, rushes,	  Dumb swimmers there among the rocks, coral, gluten, grass, rushes,	  Dumb swimmers there among the rocks, coral, gluten, grass, rushes,	  Dumb swimmers there among the rocks, coral, gluten, grass, rushes,
      and the aliment of the swimmers,	      and the aliment of the swimmers,	      and the aliment of the swimmers,	      and the aliment of the swimmers,
  Sluggish existences grazing there suspended, or slowly crawling	  Sluggish existences grazing there suspended, or slowly crawling	  Sluggish existences grazing there suspended, or slowly crawling	  Sluggish existences grazing there suspended, or slowly crawling
      close to the bottom,	      close to the bottom,	      close to the bottom,	      close to the bottom,
  The sperm-whale at the surface blowing air and spray, or disporting	  The sperm-whale at the surface blowing air and spray, or disporting	  The sperm-whale at the surface blowing air and spray, or disporting	  The sperm-whale at the surface blowing air and spray, or disporting
      with his flukes,	      with his flukes,	      with his flukes,	      with his flukes,
  The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the hairy	  The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the hairy	  The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the hairy	  The leaden-eyed shark, the walrus, the turtle, the hairy
      sea-leopard, and the sting-ray,	      sea-leopard, and the sting-ray,	      sea-leopard, and the sting-ray,	      sea-leopard, and the sting-ray,
  Passions there, wars, pursuits, tribes, sight in those ocean-depths,	  Passions there, wars, pursuits, tribes, sight in those ocean-depths,	  Passions there, wars, pursuits, tribes, sight in those ocean-depths,	  Passions there, wars, pursuits, tribes, sight in those ocean-depths,
      breathing that thick-breathing air, as so many do,	      breathing that thick-breathing air, as so many do,	      breathing that thick-breathing air, as so many do,	      breathing that thick-breathing air, as so many do,
  The change thence to the sight here, and to the subtle air breathed	  The change thence to the sight here, and to the subtle air breathed	  The change thence to the sight here, and to the subtle air breathed	  The change thence to the sight here, and to the subtle air breathed
      by beings like us who walk this sphere,	      by beings like us who walk this sphere,	      by beings like us who walk this sphere,	      by beings like us who walk this sphere,
  The change onward from ours to that of beings who walk other spheres.	  The change onward from ours to that of beings who walk other spheres.	  The change onward from ours to that of beings who walk other spheres.	  The change onward from ours to that of beings who walk other spheres.
			
			
			
			
On the Beach at Night Alone	On the Beach at Night Alone	On the Beach at Night Alone	On the Beach at Night Alone
			
  On the beach at night alone,	  On the beach at night alone,	  On the beach at night alone,	  On the beach at night alone,
  As the old mother sways her to and fro singing her husky song,	  As the old mother sways her to and fro singing her husky song,	  As the old mother sways her to and fro singing her husky song,	  As the old mother sways her to and fro singing her husky song,
  As I watch the bright stars shining, I think a thought of the clef	  As I watch the bright stars shining, I think a thought of the clef	  As I watch the bright stars shining, I think a thought of the clef	  As I watch the bright stars shining, I think a thought of the clef
      of the universes and of the future.	      of the universes and of the future.	      of the universes and of the future.	      of the universes and of the future.
			
  A vast similitude interlocks all,	  A vast similitude interlocks all,	  A vast similitude interlocks all,	  A vast similitude interlocks all,
  All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons, planets,	  All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons, planets,	  All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons, planets,	  All spheres, grown, ungrown, small, large, suns, moons, planets,
  All distances of place however wide,	  All distances of place however wide,	  All distances of place however wide,	  All distances of place however wide,
  All distances of time, all inanimate forms,	  All distances of time, all inanimate forms,	  All distances of time, all inanimate forms,	  All distances of time, all inanimate forms,
  All souls, all living bodies though they be ever so different, or in	  All souls, all living bodies though they be ever so different, or in	  All souls, all living bodies though they be ever so different, or in	  All souls, all living bodies though they be ever so different, or in
      different worlds,	      different worlds,	      different worlds,	      different worlds,
  All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes, the fishes, the brutes,	  All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes, the fishes, the brutes,	  All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes, the fishes, the brutes,	  All gaseous, watery, vegetable, mineral processes, the fishes, the brutes,
  All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages,	  All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages,	  All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages,	  All nations, colors, barbarisms, civilizations, languages,
  All identities that have existed or may exist on this globe, or any globe,	  All identities that have existed or may exist on this globe, or any globe,	  All identities that have existed or may exist on this globe, or any globe,	  All identities that have existed or may exist on this globe, or any globe,
  All lives and deaths, all of the past, present, future,	  All lives and deaths, all of the past, present, future,	  All lives and deaths, all of the past, present, future,	  All lives and deaths, all of the past, present, future,
  This vast similitude spans them, and always has spann'd,	  This vast similitude spans them, and always has spann'd,	  This vast similitude spans them, and always has spann'd,	  This vast similitude spans them, and always has spann'd,
  And shall forever span them and compactly hold and enclose them.	  And shall forever span them and compactly hold and enclose them.	  And shall forever span them and compactly hold and enclose them.	  And shall forever span them and compactly hold and enclose them.
			
			
			
			
Song for All Seas, All Ships	Song for All Seas, All Ships	Song for All Seas, All Ships	Song for All Seas, All Ships
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  To-day a rude brief recitative,	  To-day a rude brief recitative,	  To-day a rude brief recitative,	  To-day a rude brief recitative,
  Of ships sailing the seas, each with its special flag or ship-signal,	  Of ships sailing the seas, each with its special flag or ship-signal,	  Of ships sailing the seas, each with its special flag or ship-signal,	  Of ships sailing the seas, each with its special flag or ship-signal,
  Of unnamed heroes in the ships--of waves spreading and spreading	  Of unnamed heroes in the ships--of waves spreading and spreading	  Of unnamed heroes in the ships--of waves spreading and spreading	  Of unnamed heroes in the ships--of waves spreading and spreading
      far as the eye can reach,	      far as the eye can reach,	      far as the eye can reach,	      far as the eye can reach,
  Of dashing spray, and the winds piping and blowing,	  Of dashing spray, and the winds piping and blowing,	  Of dashing spray, and the winds piping and blowing,	  Of dashing spray, and the winds piping and blowing,
  And out of these a chant for the sailors of all nations,	  And out of these a chant for the sailors of all nations,	  And out of these a chant for the sailors of all nations,	  And out of these a chant for the sailors of all nations,
  Fitful, like a surge.	  Fitful, like a surge.	  Fitful, like a surge.	  Fitful, like a surge.
			
  Of sea-captains young or old, and the mates, and of all intrepid sailors,	  Of sea-captains young or old, and the mates, and of all intrepid sailors,	  Of sea-captains young or old, and the mates, and of all intrepid sailors,	  Of sea-captains young or old, and the mates, and of all intrepid sailors,
  Of the few, very choice, taciturn, whom fate can never surprise nor	  Of the few, very choice, taciturn, whom fate can never surprise nor	  Of the few, very choice, taciturn, whom fate can never surprise nor	  Of the few, very choice, taciturn, whom fate can never surprise nor
      death dismay.	      death dismay.	      death dismay.	      death dismay.
  Pick'd sparingly without noise by thee old ocean, chosen by thee,	  Pick'd sparingly without noise by thee old ocean, chosen by thee,	  Pick'd sparingly without noise by thee old ocean, chosen by thee,	  Pick'd sparingly without noise by thee old ocean, chosen by thee,
  Thou sea that pickest and cullest the race in time, and unitest nations,	  Thou sea that pickest and cullest the race in time, and unitest nations,	  Thou sea that pickest and cullest the race in time, and unitest nations,	  Thou sea that pickest and cullest the race in time, and unitest nations,
  Suckled by thee, old husky nurse, embodying thee,	  Suckled by thee, old husky nurse, embodying thee,	  Suckled by thee, old husky nurse, embodying thee,	  Suckled by thee, old husky nurse, embodying thee,
  Indomitable, untamed as thee.	  Indomitable, untamed as thee.	  Indomitable, untamed as thee.	  Indomitable, untamed as thee.
			
  (Ever the heroes on water or on land, by ones or twos appearing,	  (Ever the heroes on water or on land, by ones or twos appearing,	  (Ever the heroes on water or on land, by ones or twos appearing,	  (Ever the heroes on water or on land, by ones or twos appearing,
  Ever the stock preserv'd and never lost, though rare, enough for	  Ever the stock preserv'd and never lost, though rare, enough for	  Ever the stock preserv'd and never lost, though rare, enough for	  Ever the stock preserv'd and never lost, though rare, enough for
      seed preserv'd.)	      seed preserv'd.)	      seed preserv'd.)	      seed preserv'd.)
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Flaunt out O sea your separate flags of nations!	  Flaunt out O sea your separate flags of nations!	  Flaunt out O sea your separate flags of nations!	  Flaunt out O sea your separate flags of nations!
  Flaunt out visible as ever the various ship-signals!	  Flaunt out visible as ever the various ship-signals!	  Flaunt out visible as ever the various ship-signals!	  Flaunt out visible as ever the various ship-signals!
  But do you reserve especially for yourself and for the soul of man	  But do you reserve especially for yourself and for the soul of man	  But do you reserve especially for yourself and for the soul of man	  But do you reserve especially for yourself and for the soul of man
      one flag above all the rest,	      one flag above all the rest,	      one flag above all the rest,	      one flag above all the rest,
  A spiritual woven signal for all nations, emblem of man elate above death,	  A spiritual woven signal for all nations, emblem of man elate above death,	  A spiritual woven signal for all nations, emblem of man elate above death,	  A spiritual woven signal for all nations, emblem of man elate above death,
  Token of all brave captains and all intrepid sailors and mates,	  Token of all brave captains and all intrepid sailors and mates,	  Token of all brave captains and all intrepid sailors and mates,	  Token of all brave captains and all intrepid sailors and mates,
  And all that went down doing their duty,	  And all that went down doing their duty,	  And all that went down doing their duty,	  And all that went down doing their duty,
  Reminiscent of them, twined from all intrepid captains young or old,	  Reminiscent of them, twined from all intrepid captains young or old,	  Reminiscent of them, twined from all intrepid captains young or old,	  Reminiscent of them, twined from all intrepid captains young or old,
  A pennant universal, subtly waving all time, o'er all brave sailors,	  A pennant universal, subtly waving all time, o'er all brave sailors,	  A pennant universal, subtly waving all time, o'er all brave sailors,	  A pennant universal, subtly waving all time, o'er all brave sailors,
  All seas, all ships.	  All seas, all ships.	  All seas, all ships.	  All seas, all ships.
			
			
			
			
Patroling Barnegat	Patroling Barnegat	Patroling Barnegat	Patroling Barnegat
			
  Wild, wild the storm, and the sea high running,	  Wild, wild the storm, and the sea high running,	  Wild, wild the storm, and the sea high running,	  Wild, wild the storm, and the sea high running,
  Steady the roar of the gale, with incessant undertone muttering,	  Steady the roar of the gale, with incessant undertone muttering,	  Steady the roar of the gale, with incessant undertone muttering,	  Steady the roar of the gale, with incessant undertone muttering,
  Shouts of demoniac laughter fitfully piercing and pealing,	  Shouts of demoniac laughter fitfully piercing and pealing,	  Shouts of demoniac laughter fitfully piercing and pealing,	  Shouts of demoniac laughter fitfully piercing and pealing,
  Waves, air, midnight, their savagest trinity lashing,	  Waves, air, midnight, their savagest trinity lashing,	  Waves, air, midnight, their savagest trinity lashing,	  Waves, air, midnight, their savagest trinity lashing,
  Out in the shadows there milk-white combs careering,	  Out in the shadows there milk-white combs careering,	  Out in the shadows there milk-white combs careering,	  Out in the shadows there milk-white combs careering,
  On beachy slush and sand spirts of snow fierce slanting,	  On beachy slush and sand spirts of snow fierce slanting,	  On beachy slush and sand spirts of snow fierce slanting,	  On beachy slush and sand spirts of snow fierce slanting,
  Where through the murk the easterly death-wind breasting,	  Where through the murk the easterly death-wind breasting,	  Where through the murk the easterly death-wind breasting,	  Where through the murk the easterly death-wind breasting,
  Through cutting swirl and spray watchful and firm advancing,	  Through cutting swirl and spray watchful and firm advancing,	  Through cutting swirl and spray watchful and firm advancing,	  Through cutting swirl and spray watchful and firm advancing,
  (That in the distance! is that a wreck? is the red signal flaring?)	  (That in the distance! is that a wreck? is the red signal flaring?)	  (That in the distance! is that a wreck? is the red signal flaring?)	  (That in the distance! is that a wreck? is the red signal flaring?)
  Slush and sand of the beach tireless till daylight wending,	  Slush and sand of the beach tireless till daylight wending,	  Slush and sand of the beach tireless till daylight wending,	  Slush and sand of the beach tireless till daylight wending,
  Steadily, slowly, through hoarse roar never remitting,	  Steadily, slowly, through hoarse roar never remitting,	  Steadily, slowly, through hoarse roar never remitting,	  Steadily, slowly, through hoarse roar never remitting,
  Along the midnight edge by those milk-white combs careering,	  Along the midnight edge by those milk-white combs careering,	  Along the midnight edge by those milk-white combs careering,	  Along the midnight edge by those milk-white combs careering,
  A group of dim, weird forms, struggling, the night confronting,	  A group of dim, weird forms, struggling, the night confronting,	  A group of dim, weird forms, struggling, the night confronting,	  A group of dim, weird forms, struggling, the night confronting,
  That savage trinity warily watching.	  That savage trinity warily watching.	  That savage trinity warily watching.	  That savage trinity warily watching.
			
			
			
			
After the Sea-Ship	After the Sea-Ship	After the Sea-Ship	After the Sea-Ship
			
  After the sea-ship, after the whistling winds,	  After the sea-ship, after the whistling winds,	  After the sea-ship, after the whistling winds,	  After the sea-ship, after the whistling winds,
  After the white-gray sails taut to their spars and ropes,	  After the white-gray sails taut to their spars and ropes,	  After the white-gray sails taut to their spars and ropes,	  After the white-gray sails taut to their spars and ropes,
  Below, a myriad myriad waves hastening, lifting up their necks,	  Below, a myriad myriad waves hastening, lifting up their necks,	  Below, a myriad myriad waves hastening, lifting up their necks,	  Below, a myriad myriad waves hastening, lifting up their necks,
  Tending in ceaseless flow toward the track of the ship,	  Tending in ceaseless flow toward the track of the ship,	  Tending in ceaseless flow toward the track of the ship,	  Tending in ceaseless flow toward the track of the ship,
  Waves of the ocean bubbling and gurgling, blithely prying,	  Waves of the ocean bubbling and gurgling, blithely prying,	  Waves of the ocean bubbling and gurgling, blithely prying,	  Waves of the ocean bubbling and gurgling, blithely prying,
  Waves, undulating waves, liquid, uneven, emulous waves,	  Waves, undulating waves, liquid, uneven, emulous waves,	  Waves, undulating waves, liquid, uneven, emulous waves,	  Waves, undulating waves, liquid, uneven, emulous waves,
  Toward that whirling current, laughing and buoyant, with curves,	  Toward that whirling current, laughing and buoyant, with curves,	  Toward that whirling current, laughing and buoyant, with curves,	  Toward that whirling current, laughing and buoyant, with curves,
  Where the great vessel sailing and tacking displaced the surface,	  Where the great vessel sailing and tacking displaced the surface,	  Where the great vessel sailing and tacking displaced the surface,	  Where the great vessel sailing and tacking displaced the surface,
  Larger and smaller waves in the spread of the ocean yearnfully flowing,	  Larger and smaller waves in the spread of the ocean yearnfully flowing,	  Larger and smaller waves in the spread of the ocean yearnfully flowing,	  Larger and smaller waves in the spread of the ocean yearnfully flowing,
  The wake of the sea-ship after she passes, flashing and frolicsome	  The wake of the sea-ship after she passes, flashing and frolicsome	  The wake of the sea-ship after she passes, flashing and frolicsome	  The wake of the sea-ship after she passes, flashing and frolicsome
      under the sun,	      under the sun,	      under the sun,	      under the sun,
  A motley procession with many a fleck of foam and many fragments,	  A motley procession with many a fleck of foam and many fragments,	  A motley procession with many a fleck of foam and many fragments,	  A motley procession with many a fleck of foam and many fragments,
  Following the stately and rapid ship, in the wake following.	  Following the stately and rapid ship, in the wake following.	  Following the stately and rapid ship, in the wake following.	  Following the stately and rapid ship, in the wake following.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XX.  BY THE ROADSIDE	BOOK XX.  BY THE ROADSIDE	BOOK XX.  BY THE ROADSIDE	BOOK XX.  BY THE ROADSIDE
			
			
A Boston Ballad [1854]	A Boston Ballad [1854]	A Boston Ballad [1854]	A Boston Ballad [1854]
			
  To get betimes in Boston town I rose this morning early,	  To get betimes in Boston town I rose this morning early,	  To get betimes in Boston town I rose this morning early,	  To get betimes in Boston town I rose this morning early,
  Here's a good place at the corner, I must stand and see the show.	  Here's a good place at the corner, I must stand and see the show.	  Here's a good place at the corner, I must stand and see the show.	  Here's a good place at the corner, I must stand and see the show.
			
  Clear the way there Jonathan!	  Clear the way there Jonathan!	  Clear the way there Jonathan!	  Clear the way there Jonathan!
  Way for the President's marshal--way for the government cannon!	  Way for the President's marshal--way for the government cannon!	  Way for the President's marshal--way for the government cannon!	  Way for the President's marshal--way for the government cannon!
  Way for the Federal foot and dragoons, (and the apparitions	  Way for the Federal foot and dragoons, (and the apparitions	  Way for the Federal foot and dragoons, (and the apparitions	  Way for the Federal foot and dragoons, (and the apparitions
      copiously tumbling.)	      copiously tumbling.)	      copiously tumbling.)	      copiously tumbling.)
			
  I love to look on the Stars and Stripes, I hope the fifes will play	  I love to look on the Stars and Stripes, I hope the fifes will play	  I love to look on the Stars and Stripes, I hope the fifes will play	  I love to look on the Stars and Stripes, I hope the fifes will play
      Yankee Doodle.	      Yankee Doodle.	      Yankee Doodle.	      Yankee Doodle.
  How bright shine the cutlasses of the foremost troops!	  How bright shine the cutlasses of the foremost troops!	  How bright shine the cutlasses of the foremost troops!	  How bright shine the cutlasses of the foremost troops!
  Every man holds his revolver, marching stiff through Boston town.	  Every man holds his revolver, marching stiff through Boston town.	  Every man holds his revolver, marching stiff through Boston town.	  Every man holds his revolver, marching stiff through Boston town.
			
  A fog follows, antiques of the same come limping,	  A fog follows, antiques of the same come limping,	  A fog follows, antiques of the same come limping,	  A fog follows, antiques of the same come limping,
  Some appear wooden-legged, and some appear bandaged and bloodless.	  Some appear wooden-legged, and some appear bandaged and bloodless.	  Some appear wooden-legged, and some appear bandaged and bloodless.	  Some appear wooden-legged, and some appear bandaged and bloodless.
			
  Why this is indeed a show--it has called the dead out of the earth!	  Why this is indeed a show--it has called the dead out of the earth!	  Why this is indeed a show--it has called the dead out of the earth!	  Why this is indeed a show--it has called the dead out of the earth!
  The old graveyards of the hills have hurried to see!	  The old graveyards of the hills have hurried to see!	  The old graveyards of the hills have hurried to see!	  The old graveyards of the hills have hurried to see!
  Phantoms! phantoms countless by flank and rear!	  Phantoms! phantoms countless by flank and rear!	  Phantoms! phantoms countless by flank and rear!	  Phantoms! phantoms countless by flank and rear!
  Cock'd hats of mothy mould--crutches made of mist!	  Cock'd hats of mothy mould--crutches made of mist!	  Cock'd hats of mothy mould--crutches made of mist!	  Cock'd hats of mothy mould--crutches made of mist!
  Arms in slings--old men leaning on young men's shoulders.	  Arms in slings--old men leaning on young men's shoulders.	  Arms in slings--old men leaning on young men's shoulders.	  Arms in slings--old men leaning on young men's shoulders.
			
  What troubles you Yankee phantoms? what is all this chattering of	  What troubles you Yankee phantoms? what is all this chattering of	  What troubles you Yankee phantoms? what is all this chattering of	  What troubles you Yankee phantoms? what is all this chattering of
      bare gums?	      bare gums?	      bare gums?	      bare gums?
  Does the ague convulse your limbs? do you mistake your crutches for	  Does the ague convulse your limbs? do you mistake your crutches for	  Does the ague convulse your limbs? do you mistake your crutches for	  Does the ague convulse your limbs? do you mistake your crutches for
      firelocks and level them?	      firelocks and level them?	      firelocks and level them?	      firelocks and level them?
			
  If you blind your eyes with tears you will not see the President's marshal,	  If you blind your eyes with tears you will not see the President's marshal,	  If you blind your eyes with tears you will not see the President's marshal,	  If you blind your eyes with tears you will not see the President's marshal,
  If you groan such groans you might balk the government cannon.	  If you groan such groans you might balk the government cannon.	  If you groan such groans you might balk the government cannon.	  If you groan such groans you might balk the government cannon.
			
  For shame old maniacs--bring down those toss'd arms, and let your	  For shame old maniacs--bring down those toss'd arms, and let your	  For shame old maniacs--bring down those toss'd arms, and let your	  For shame old maniacs--bring down those toss'd arms, and let your
      white hair be,	      white hair be,	      white hair be,	      white hair be,
  Here gape your great grandsons, their wives gaze at them from the windows,	  Here gape your great grandsons, their wives gaze at them from the windows,	  Here gape your great grandsons, their wives gaze at them from the windows,	  Here gape your great grandsons, their wives gaze at them from the windows,
  See how well dress'd, see how orderly they conduct themselves.	  See how well dress'd, see how orderly they conduct themselves.	  See how well dress'd, see how orderly they conduct themselves.	  See how well dress'd, see how orderly they conduct themselves.
			
  Worse and worse--can't you stand it? are you retreating?	  Worse and worse--can't you stand it? are you retreating?	  Worse and worse--can't you stand it? are you retreating?	  Worse and worse--can't you stand it? are you retreating?
  Is this hour with the living too dead for you?	  Is this hour with the living too dead for you?	  Is this hour with the living too dead for you?	  Is this hour with the living too dead for you?
			
  Retreat then--pell-mell!	  Retreat then--pell-mell!	  Retreat then--pell-mell!	  Retreat then--pell-mell!
  To your graves--back--back to the hills old limpers!	  To your graves--back--back to the hills old limpers!	  To your graves--back--back to the hills old limpers!	  To your graves--back--back to the hills old limpers!
  I do not think you belong here anyhow.	  I do not think you belong here anyhow.	  I do not think you belong here anyhow.	  I do not think you belong here anyhow.
			
  But there is one thing that belongs here--shall I tell you what it	  But there is one thing that belongs here--shall I tell you what it	  But there is one thing that belongs here--shall I tell you what it	  But there is one thing that belongs here--shall I tell you what it
      is, gentlemen of Boston?	      is, gentlemen of Boston?	      is, gentlemen of Boston?	      is, gentlemen of Boston?
			
  I will whisper it to the Mayor, he shall send a committee to England,	  I will whisper it to the Mayor, he shall send a committee to England,	  I will whisper it to the Mayor, he shall send a committee to England,	  I will whisper it to the Mayor, he shall send a committee to England,
  They shall get a grant from the Parliament, go with a cart to the	  They shall get a grant from the Parliament, go with a cart to the	  They shall get a grant from the Parliament, go with a cart to the	  They shall get a grant from the Parliament, go with a cart to the
      royal vault,	      royal vault,	      royal vault,	      royal vault,
  Dig out King George's coffin, unwrap him quick from the	  Dig out King George's coffin, unwrap him quick from the	  Dig out King George's coffin, unwrap him quick from the	  Dig out King George's coffin, unwrap him quick from the
      graveclothes, box up his bones for a journey,	      graveclothes, box up his bones for a journey,	      graveclothes, box up his bones for a journey,	      graveclothes, box up his bones for a journey,
  Find a swift Yankee clipper--here is freight for you, black-bellied clipper,	  Find a swift Yankee clipper--here is freight for you, black-bellied clipper,	  Find a swift Yankee clipper--here is freight for you, black-bellied clipper,	  Find a swift Yankee clipper--here is freight for you, black-bellied clipper,
  Up with your anchor--shake out your sails--steer straight toward	  Up with your anchor--shake out your sails--steer straight toward	  Up with your anchor--shake out your sails--steer straight toward	  Up with your anchor--shake out your sails--steer straight toward
      Boston bay.	      Boston bay.	      Boston bay.	      Boston bay.
			
  Now call for the President's marshal again, bring out the government cannon,	  Now call for the President's marshal again, bring out the government cannon,	  Now call for the President's marshal again, bring out the government cannon,	  Now call for the President's marshal again, bring out the government cannon,
  Fetch home the roarers from Congress, make another procession,	  Fetch home the roarers from Congress, make another procession,	  Fetch home the roarers from Congress, make another procession,	  Fetch home the roarers from Congress, make another procession,
      guard it with foot and dragoons.	      guard it with foot and dragoons.	      guard it with foot and dragoons.	      guard it with foot and dragoons.
			
  This centre-piece for them;	  This centre-piece for them;	  This centre-piece for them;	  This centre-piece for them;
  Look, all orderly citizens--look from the windows, women!	  Look, all orderly citizens--look from the windows, women!	  Look, all orderly citizens--look from the windows, women!	  Look, all orderly citizens--look from the windows, women!
			
  The committee open the box, set up the regal ribs, glue those that	  The committee open the box, set up the regal ribs, glue those that	  The committee open the box, set up the regal ribs, glue those that	  The committee open the box, set up the regal ribs, glue those that
      will not stay,	      will not stay,	      will not stay,	      will not stay,
  Clap the skull on top of the ribs, and clap a crown on top of the skull.	  Clap the skull on top of the ribs, and clap a crown on top of the skull.	  Clap the skull on top of the ribs, and clap a crown on top of the skull.	  Clap the skull on top of the ribs, and clap a crown on top of the skull.
  You have got your revenge, old buster--the crown is come to its own,	  You have got your revenge, old buster--the crown is come to its own,	  You have got your revenge, old buster--the crown is come to its own,	  You have got your revenge, old buster--the crown is come to its own,
      and more than its own.	      and more than its own.	      and more than its own.	      and more than its own.
			
  Stick your hands in your pockets, Jonathan--you are a made man from	  Stick your hands in your pockets, Jonathan--you are a made man from	  Stick your hands in your pockets, Jonathan--you are a made man from	  Stick your hands in your pockets, Jonathan--you are a made man from
      this day,	      this day,	      this day,	      this day,
  You are mighty cute--and here is one of your bargains.	  You are mighty cute--and here is one of your bargains.	  You are mighty cute--and here is one of your bargains.	  You are mighty cute--and here is one of your bargains.
			
			
			
			
Europe [The 72d and 73d Years of These States]	Europe [The 72d and 73d Years of These States]	Europe [The 72d and 73d Years of These States]	Europe [The 72d and 73d Years of These States]
			
  Suddenly out of its stale and drowsy lair, the lair of slaves,	  Suddenly out of its stale and drowsy lair, the lair of slaves,	  Suddenly out of its stale and drowsy lair, the lair of slaves,	  Suddenly out of its stale and drowsy lair, the lair of slaves,
  Like lightning it le'pt forth half startled at itself,	  Like lightning it le'pt forth half startled at itself,	  Like lightning it le'pt forth half startled at itself,	  Like lightning it le'pt forth half startled at itself,
  Its feet upon the ashes and the rags, its hands tight to the throats	  Its feet upon the ashes and the rags, its hands tight to the throats	  Its feet upon the ashes and the rags, its hands tight to the throats	  Its feet upon the ashes and the rags, its hands tight to the throats
      of kings.	      of kings.	      of kings.	      of kings.
			
  O hope and faith!	  O hope and faith!	  O hope and faith!	  O hope and faith!
  O aching close of exiled patriots' lives!	  O aching close of exiled patriots' lives!	  O aching close of exiled patriots' lives!	  O aching close of exiled patriots' lives!
  O many a sicken'd heart!	  O many a sicken'd heart!	  O many a sicken'd heart!	  O many a sicken'd heart!
  Turn back unto this day and make yourselves afresh.	  Turn back unto this day and make yourselves afresh.	  Turn back unto this day and make yourselves afresh.	  Turn back unto this day and make yourselves afresh.
			
  And you, paid to defile the People--you liars, mark!	  And you, paid to defile the People--you liars, mark!	  And you, paid to defile the People--you liars, mark!	  And you, paid to defile the People--you liars, mark!
  Not for numberless agonies, murders, lusts,	  Not for numberless agonies, murders, lusts,	  Not for numberless agonies, murders, lusts,	  Not for numberless agonies, murders, lusts,
  For court thieving in its manifold mean forms, worming from his	  For court thieving in its manifold mean forms, worming from his	  For court thieving in its manifold mean forms, worming from his	  For court thieving in its manifold mean forms, worming from his
      simplicity the poor man's wages,	      simplicity the poor man's wages,	      simplicity the poor man's wages,	      simplicity the poor man's wages,
  For many a promise sworn by royal lips and broken and laugh'd at in	  For many a promise sworn by royal lips and broken and laugh'd at in	  For many a promise sworn by royal lips and broken and laugh'd at in	  For many a promise sworn by royal lips and broken and laugh'd at in
      the breaking,	      the breaking,	      the breaking,	      the breaking,
			
  Then in their power not for all these did the blows strike revenge,	  Then in their power not for all these did the blows strike revenge,	  Then in their power not for all these did the blows strike revenge,	  Then in their power not for all these did the blows strike revenge,
      or the heads of the nobles fall;	      or the heads of the nobles fall;	      or the heads of the nobles fall;	      or the heads of the nobles fall;
  The People scorn'd the ferocity of kings.	  The People scorn'd the ferocity of kings.	  The People scorn'd the ferocity of kings.	  The People scorn'd the ferocity of kings.
			
  But the sweetness of mercy brew'd bitter destruction, and the	  But the sweetness of mercy brew'd bitter destruction, and the	  But the sweetness of mercy brew'd bitter destruction, and the	  But the sweetness of mercy brew'd bitter destruction, and the
      frighten'd monarchs come back,	      frighten'd monarchs come back,	      frighten'd monarchs come back,	      frighten'd monarchs come back,
  Each comes in state with his train, hangman, priest, tax-gatherer,	  Each comes in state with his train, hangman, priest, tax-gatherer,	  Each comes in state with his train, hangman, priest, tax-gatherer,	  Each comes in state with his train, hangman, priest, tax-gatherer,
  Soldier, lawyer, lord, jailer, and sycophant.	  Soldier, lawyer, lord, jailer, and sycophant.	  Soldier, lawyer, lord, jailer, and sycophant.	  Soldier, lawyer, lord, jailer, and sycophant.
			
  Yet behind all lowering stealing, lo, a shape,	  Yet behind all lowering stealing, lo, a shape,	  Yet behind all lowering stealing, lo, a shape,	  Yet behind all lowering stealing, lo, a shape,
  Vague as the night, draped interminably, head, front and form, in	  Vague as the night, draped interminably, head, front and form, in	  Vague as the night, draped interminably, head, front and form, in	  Vague as the night, draped interminably, head, front and form, in
      scarlet folds,	      scarlet folds,	      scarlet folds,	      scarlet folds,
  Whose face and eyes none may see,	  Whose face and eyes none may see,	  Whose face and eyes none may see,	  Whose face and eyes none may see,
  Out of its robes only this, the red robes lifted by the arm,	  Out of its robes only this, the red robes lifted by the arm,	  Out of its robes only this, the red robes lifted by the arm,	  Out of its robes only this, the red robes lifted by the arm,
  One finger crook'd pointed high over the top, like the head of a	  One finger crook'd pointed high over the top, like the head of a	  One finger crook'd pointed high over the top, like the head of a	  One finger crook'd pointed high over the top, like the head of a
      snake appears.	      snake appears.	      snake appears.	      snake appears.
			
  Meanwhile corpses lie in new-made graves, bloody corpses of young men,	  Meanwhile corpses lie in new-made graves, bloody corpses of young men,	  Meanwhile corpses lie in new-made graves, bloody corpses of young men,	  Meanwhile corpses lie in new-made graves, bloody corpses of young men,
  The rope of the gibbet hangs heavily, the bullets of princes are	  The rope of the gibbet hangs heavily, the bullets of princes are	  The rope of the gibbet hangs heavily, the bullets of princes are	  The rope of the gibbet hangs heavily, the bullets of princes are
      flying, the creatures of power laugh aloud,	      flying, the creatures of power laugh aloud,	      flying, the creatures of power laugh aloud,	      flying, the creatures of power laugh aloud,
  And all these things bear fruits, and they are good.	  And all these things bear fruits, and they are good.	  And all these things bear fruits, and they are good.	  And all these things bear fruits, and they are good.
			
  Those corpses of young men,	  Those corpses of young men,	  Those corpses of young men,	  Those corpses of young men,
  Those martyrs that hang from the gibbets, those hearts pierc'd by	  Those martyrs that hang from the gibbets, those hearts pierc'd by	  Those martyrs that hang from the gibbets, those hearts pierc'd by	  Those martyrs that hang from the gibbets, those hearts pierc'd by
      the gray lead,	      the gray lead,	      the gray lead,	      the gray lead,
  Cold and motionless as they seem live elsewhere with unslaughter'd vitality.	  Cold and motionless as they seem live elsewhere with unslaughter'd vitality.	  Cold and motionless as they seem live elsewhere with unslaughter'd vitality.	  Cold and motionless as they seem live elsewhere with unslaughter'd vitality.
			
  They live in other young men O kings!	  They live in other young men O kings!	  They live in other young men O kings!	  They live in other young men O kings!
  They live in brothers again ready to defy you,	  They live in brothers again ready to defy you,	  They live in brothers again ready to defy you,	  They live in brothers again ready to defy you,
  They were purified by death, they were taught and exalted.	  They were purified by death, they were taught and exalted.	  They were purified by death, they were taught and exalted.	  They were purified by death, they were taught and exalted.
			
  Not a grave of the murder'd for freedom but grows seed for freedom,	  Not a grave of the murder'd for freedom but grows seed for freedom,	  Not a grave of the murder'd for freedom but grows seed for freedom,	  Not a grave of the murder'd for freedom but grows seed for freedom,
      in its turn to bear seed,	      in its turn to bear seed,	      in its turn to bear seed,	      in its turn to bear seed,
  Which the winds carry afar and re-sow, and the rains and the snows nourish.	  Which the winds carry afar and re-sow, and the rains and the snows nourish.	  Which the winds carry afar and re-sow, and the rains and the snows nourish.	  Which the winds carry afar and re-sow, and the rains and the snows nourish.
			
  Not a disembodied spirit can the weapons of tyrants let loose,	  Not a disembodied spirit can the weapons of tyrants let loose,	  Not a disembodied spirit can the weapons of tyrants let loose,	  Not a disembodied spirit can the weapons of tyrants let loose,
  But it stalks invisibly over the earth, whispering, counseling, cautioning.	  But it stalks invisibly over the earth, whispering, counseling, cautioning.	  But it stalks invisibly over the earth, whispering, counseling, cautioning.	  But it stalks invisibly over the earth, whispering, counseling, cautioning.
  Liberty, let others despair of you--I never despair of you.	  Liberty, let others despair of you--I never despair of you.	  Liberty, let others despair of you--I never despair of you.	  Liberty, let others despair of you--I never despair of you.
			
  Is the house shut? is the master away?	  Is the house shut? is the master away?	  Is the house shut? is the master away?	  Is the house shut? is the master away?
  Nevertheless, be ready, be not weary of watching,	  Nevertheless, be ready, be not weary of watching,	  Nevertheless, be ready, be not weary of watching,	  Nevertheless, be ready, be not weary of watching,
  He will soon return, his messengers come anon.	  He will soon return, his messengers come anon.	  He will soon return, his messengers come anon.	  He will soon return, his messengers come anon.
			
			
			
			
A Hand-Mirror	A Hand-Mirror	A Hand-Mirror	A Hand-Mirror
			
  Hold it up sternly--see this it sends back, (who is it? is it you?)	  Hold it up sternly--see this it sends back, (who is it? is it you?)	  Hold it up sternly--see this it sends back, (who is it? is it you?)	  Hold it up sternly--see this it sends back, (who is it? is it you?)
  Outside fair costume, within ashes and filth,	  Outside fair costume, within ashes and filth,	  Outside fair costume, within ashes and filth,	  Outside fair costume, within ashes and filth,
  No more a flashing eye, no more a sonorous voice or springy step,	  No more a flashing eye, no more a sonorous voice or springy step,	  No more a flashing eye, no more a sonorous voice or springy step,	  No more a flashing eye, no more a sonorous voice or springy step,
  Now some slave's eye, voice, hands, step,	  Now some slave's eye, voice, hands, step,	  Now some slave's eye, voice, hands, step,	  Now some slave's eye, voice, hands, step,
  A drunkard's breath, unwholesome eater's face, venerealee's flesh,	  A drunkard's breath, unwholesome eater's face, venerealee's flesh,	  A drunkard's breath, unwholesome eater's face, venerealee's flesh,	  A drunkard's breath, unwholesome eater's face, venerealee's flesh,
  Lungs rotting away piecemeal, stomach sour and cankerous,	  Lungs rotting away piecemeal, stomach sour and cankerous,	  Lungs rotting away piecemeal, stomach sour and cankerous,	  Lungs rotting away piecemeal, stomach sour and cankerous,
  Joints rheumatic, bowels clogged with abomination,	  Joints rheumatic, bowels clogged with abomination,	  Joints rheumatic, bowels clogged with abomination,	  Joints rheumatic, bowels clogged with abomination,
  Blood circulating dark and poisonous streams,	  Blood circulating dark and poisonous streams,	  Blood circulating dark and poisonous streams,	  Blood circulating dark and poisonous streams,
  Words babble, hearing and touch callous,	  Words babble, hearing and touch callous,	  Words babble, hearing and touch callous,	  Words babble, hearing and touch callous,
  No brain, no heart left, no magnetism of sex;	  No brain, no heart left, no magnetism of sex;	  No brain, no heart left, no magnetism of sex;	  No brain, no heart left, no magnetism of sex;
  Such from one look in this looking-glass ere you go hence,	  Such from one look in this looking-glass ere you go hence,	  Such from one look in this looking-glass ere you go hence,	  Such from one look in this looking-glass ere you go hence,
  Such a result so soon--and from such a beginning!	  Such a result so soon--and from such a beginning!	  Such a result so soon--and from such a beginning!	  Such a result so soon--and from such a beginning!
			
			
			
			
Gods	Gods	Gods	Gods
			
  Lover divine and perfect Comrade,	  Lover divine and perfect Comrade,	  Lover divine and perfect Comrade,	  Lover divine and perfect Comrade,
  Waiting content, invisible yet, but certain,	  Waiting content, invisible yet, but certain,	  Waiting content, invisible yet, but certain,	  Waiting content, invisible yet, but certain,
  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.
			
  Thou, thou, the Ideal Man,	  Thou, thou, the Ideal Man,	  Thou, thou, the Ideal Man,	  Thou, thou, the Ideal Man,
  Fair, able, beautiful, content, and loving,	  Fair, able, beautiful, content, and loving,	  Fair, able, beautiful, content, and loving,	  Fair, able, beautiful, content, and loving,
  Complete in body and dilate in spirit,	  Complete in body and dilate in spirit,	  Complete in body and dilate in spirit,	  Complete in body and dilate in spirit,
  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.
			
  O Death, (for Life has served its turn,)	  O Death, (for Life has served its turn,)	  O Death, (for Life has served its turn,)	  O Death, (for Life has served its turn,)
  Opener and usher to the heavenly mansion,	  Opener and usher to the heavenly mansion,	  Opener and usher to the heavenly mansion,	  Opener and usher to the heavenly mansion,
  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.
			
  Aught, aught of mightiest, best I see, conceive, or know,	  Aught, aught of mightiest, best I see, conceive, or know,	  Aught, aught of mightiest, best I see, conceive, or know,	  Aught, aught of mightiest, best I see, conceive, or know,
  (To break the stagnant tie--thee, thee to free, O soul,)	  (To break the stagnant tie--thee, thee to free, O soul,)	  (To break the stagnant tie--thee, thee to free, O soul,)	  (To break the stagnant tie--thee, thee to free, O soul,)
  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.	  Be thou my God.
			
  All great ideas, the races' aspirations,	  All great ideas, the races' aspirations,	  All great ideas, the races' aspirations,	  All great ideas, the races' aspirations,
  All heroisms, deeds of rapt enthusiasts,	  All heroisms, deeds of rapt enthusiasts,	  All heroisms, deeds of rapt enthusiasts,	  All heroisms, deeds of rapt enthusiasts,
  Be ye my Gods.	  Be ye my Gods.	  Be ye my Gods.	  Be ye my Gods.
			
  Or Time and Space,	  Or Time and Space,	  Or Time and Space,	  Or Time and Space,
  Or shape of Earth divine and wondrous,	  Or shape of Earth divine and wondrous,	  Or shape of Earth divine and wondrous,	  Or shape of Earth divine and wondrous,
  Or some fair shape I viewing, worship,	  Or some fair shape I viewing, worship,	  Or some fair shape I viewing, worship,	  Or some fair shape I viewing, worship,
  Or lustrous orb of sun or star by night,	  Or lustrous orb of sun or star by night,	  Or lustrous orb of sun or star by night,	  Or lustrous orb of sun or star by night,
  Be ye my Gods.	  Be ye my Gods.	  Be ye my Gods.	  Be ye my Gods.
			
			
			
			
Germs	Germs	Germs	Germs
			
  Forms, qualities, lives, humanity, language, thoughts,	  Forms, qualities, lives, humanity, language, thoughts,	  Forms, qualities, lives, humanity, language, thoughts,	  Forms, qualities, lives, humanity, language, thoughts,
  The ones known, and the ones unknown, the ones on the stars,	  The ones known, and the ones unknown, the ones on the stars,	  The ones known, and the ones unknown, the ones on the stars,	  The ones known, and the ones unknown, the ones on the stars,
  The stars themselves, some shaped, others unshaped,	  The stars themselves, some shaped, others unshaped,	  The stars themselves, some shaped, others unshaped,	  The stars themselves, some shaped, others unshaped,
  Wonders as of those countries, the soil, trees, cities, inhabitants,	  Wonders as of those countries, the soil, trees, cities, inhabitants,	  Wonders as of those countries, the soil, trees, cities, inhabitants,	  Wonders as of those countries, the soil, trees, cities, inhabitants,
      whatever they may be,	      whatever they may be,	      whatever they may be,	      whatever they may be,
  Splendid suns, the moons and rings, the countless combinations and effects,	  Splendid suns, the moons and rings, the countless combinations and effects,	  Splendid suns, the moons and rings, the countless combinations and effects,	  Splendid suns, the moons and rings, the countless combinations and effects,
  Such-like, and as good as such-like, visible here or anywhere, stand	  Such-like, and as good as such-like, visible here or anywhere, stand	  Such-like, and as good as such-like, visible here or anywhere, stand	  Such-like, and as good as such-like, visible here or anywhere, stand
      provided for a handful of space, which I extend my arm and	      provided for a handful of space, which I extend my arm and	      provided for a handful of space, which I extend my arm and	      provided for a handful of space, which I extend my arm and
      half enclose with my hand,	      half enclose with my hand,	      half enclose with my hand,	      half enclose with my hand,
  That containing the start of each and all, the virtue, the germs of all.	  That containing the start of each and all, the virtue, the germs of all.	  That containing the start of each and all, the virtue, the germs of all.	  That containing the start of each and all, the virtue, the germs of all.
			
			
			
			
Thoughts	Thoughts	Thoughts	Thoughts
			
  Of ownership--as if one fit to own things could not at pleasure enter	  Of ownership--as if one fit to own things could not at pleasure enter	  Of ownership--as if one fit to own things could not at pleasure enter	  Of ownership--as if one fit to own things could not at pleasure enter
      upon all, and incorporate them into himself or herself;	      upon all, and incorporate them into himself or herself;	      upon all, and incorporate them into himself or herself;	      upon all, and incorporate them into himself or herself;
  Of vista--suppose some sight in arriere through the formative chaos,	  Of vista--suppose some sight in arriere through the formative chaos,	  Of vista--suppose some sight in arriere through the formative chaos,	  Of vista--suppose some sight in arriere through the formative chaos,
      presuming the growth, fulness, life, now attain'd on the journey,	      presuming the growth, fulness, life, now attain'd on the journey,	      presuming the growth, fulness, life, now attain'd on the journey,	      presuming the growth, fulness, life, now attain'd on the journey,
  (But I see the road continued, and the journey ever continued;)	  (But I see the road continued, and the journey ever continued;)	  (But I see the road continued, and the journey ever continued;)	  (But I see the road continued, and the journey ever continued;)
  Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time has become	  Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time has become	  Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time has become	  Of what was once lacking on earth, and in due time has become
      supplied--and of what will yet be supplied,	      supplied--and of what will yet be supplied,	      supplied--and of what will yet be supplied,	      supplied--and of what will yet be supplied,
  Because all I see and know I believe to have its main purport in	  Because all I see and know I believe to have its main purport in	  Because all I see and know I believe to have its main purport in	  Because all I see and know I believe to have its main purport in
      what will yet be supplied.	      what will yet be supplied.	      what will yet be supplied.	      what will yet be supplied.
			
			
			
When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer	When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer	When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer	When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer
			
  When I heard the learn'd astronomer,	  When I heard the learn'd astronomer,	  When I heard the learn'd astronomer,	  When I heard the learn'd astronomer,
  When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,	  When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,	  When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,	  When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,
  When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,	  When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,	  When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,	  When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide, and measure them,
  When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much	  When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much	  When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much	  When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with much
      applause in the lecture-room,	      applause in the lecture-room,	      applause in the lecture-room,	      applause in the lecture-room,
  How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,	  How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,	  How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,	  How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick,
  Till rising and gliding out I wander'd off by myself,	  Till rising and gliding out I wander'd off by myself,	  Till rising and gliding out I wander'd off by myself,	  Till rising and gliding out I wander'd off by myself,
  In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,	  In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,	  In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,	  In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,
  Look'd up in perfect silence at the stars.	  Look'd up in perfect silence at the stars.	  Look'd up in perfect silence at the stars.	  Look'd up in perfect silence at the stars.
			
			
			
			
Perfections	Perfections	Perfections	Perfections
			
  Only themselves understand themselves and the like of themselves,	  Only themselves understand themselves and the like of themselves,	  Only themselves understand themselves and the like of themselves,	  Only themselves understand themselves and the like of themselves,
  As souls only understand souls.	  As souls only understand souls.	  As souls only understand souls.	  As souls only understand souls.
			
			
			
			
O Me! O Life!	O Me! O Life!	O Me! O Life!	O Me! O Life!
			
  O me! O life! of the questions of these recurring,	  O me! O life! of the questions of these recurring,	  O me! O life! of the questions of these recurring,	  O me! O life! of the questions of these recurring,
  Of the endless trains of the faithless, of cities fill'd with the foolish,	  Of the endless trains of the faithless, of cities fill'd with the foolish,	  Of the endless trains of the faithless, of cities fill'd with the foolish,	  Of the endless trains of the faithless, of cities fill'd with the foolish,
  Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I,	  Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I,	  Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I,	  Of myself forever reproaching myself, (for who more foolish than I,
      and who more faithless?)	      and who more faithless?)	      and who more faithless?)	      and who more faithless?)
  Of eyes that vainly crave the light, of the objects mean, of the	  Of eyes that vainly crave the light, of the objects mean, of the	  Of eyes that vainly crave the light, of the objects mean, of the	  Of eyes that vainly crave the light, of the objects mean, of the
      struggle ever renew'd,	      struggle ever renew'd,	      struggle ever renew'd,	      struggle ever renew'd,
  Of the poor results of all, of the plodding and sordid crowds I see	  Of the poor results of all, of the plodding and sordid crowds I see	  Of the poor results of all, of the plodding and sordid crowds I see	  Of the poor results of all, of the plodding and sordid crowds I see
      around me,	      around me,	      around me,	      around me,
  Of the empty and useless years of the rest, with the rest me intertwined,	  Of the empty and useless years of the rest, with the rest me intertwined,	  Of the empty and useless years of the rest, with the rest me intertwined,	  Of the empty and useless years of the rest, with the rest me intertwined,
  The question, O me! so sad, recurring--What good amid these, O me, O life?	  The question, O me! so sad, recurring--What good amid these, O me, O life?	  The question, O me! so sad, recurring--What good amid these, O me, O life?	  The question, O me! so sad, recurring--What good amid these, O me, O life?
			
       Answer.	       Answer.	       Answer.	       Answer.
  That you are here--that life exists and identity,	  That you are here--that life exists and identity,	  That you are here--that life exists and identity,	  That you are here--that life exists and identity,
  That the powerful play goes on, and you may contribute a verse.	  That the powerful play goes on, and you may contribute a verse.	  That the powerful play goes on, and you may contribute a verse.	  That the powerful play goes on, and you may contribute a verse.
			
			
			
			
To a President	To a President	To a President	To a President
			
  All you are doing and saying is to America dangled mirages,	  All you are doing and saying is to America dangled mirages,	  All you are doing and saying is to America dangled mirages,	  All you are doing and saying is to America dangled mirages,
  You have not learn'd of Nature--of the politics of Nature you have	  You have not learn'd of Nature--of the politics of Nature you have	  You have not learn'd of Nature--of the politics of Nature you have	  You have not learn'd of Nature--of the politics of Nature you have
      not learn'd the great amplitude, rectitude, impartiality,	      not learn'd the great amplitude, rectitude, impartiality,	      not learn'd the great amplitude, rectitude, impartiality,	      not learn'd the great amplitude, rectitude, impartiality,
  You have not seen that only such as they are for these States,	  You have not seen that only such as they are for these States,	  You have not seen that only such as they are for these States,	  You have not seen that only such as they are for these States,
  And that what is less than they must sooner or later lift off from	  And that what is less than they must sooner or later lift off from	  And that what is less than they must sooner or later lift off from	  And that what is less than they must sooner or later lift off from
      these States.	      these States.	      these States.	      these States.
			
			
			
			
I Sit and Look Out	I Sit and Look Out	I Sit and Look Out	I Sit and Look Out
			
  I sit and look out upon all the sorrows of the world, and upon all	  I sit and look out upon all the sorrows of the world, and upon all	  I sit and look out upon all the sorrows of the world, and upon all	  I sit and look out upon all the sorrows of the world, and upon all
      oppression and shame,	      oppression and shame,	      oppression and shame,	      oppression and shame,
  I hear secret convulsive sobs from young men at anguish with	  I hear secret convulsive sobs from young men at anguish with	  I hear secret convulsive sobs from young men at anguish with	  I hear secret convulsive sobs from young men at anguish with
      themselves, remorseful after deeds done,	      themselves, remorseful after deeds done,	      themselves, remorseful after deeds done,	      themselves, remorseful after deeds done,
  I see in low life the mother misused by her children, dying,	  I see in low life the mother misused by her children, dying,	  I see in low life the mother misused by her children, dying,	  I see in low life the mother misused by her children, dying,
      neglected, gaunt, desperate,	      neglected, gaunt, desperate,	      neglected, gaunt, desperate,	      neglected, gaunt, desperate,
  I see the wife misused by her husband, I see the treacherous seducer	  I see the wife misused by her husband, I see the treacherous seducer	  I see the wife misused by her husband, I see the treacherous seducer	  I see the wife misused by her husband, I see the treacherous seducer
      of young women,	      of young women,	      of young women,	      of young women,
  I mark the ranklings of jealousy and unrequited love attempted to be	  I mark the ranklings of jealousy and unrequited love attempted to be	  I mark the ranklings of jealousy and unrequited love attempted to be	  I mark the ranklings of jealousy and unrequited love attempted to be
      hid, I see these sights on the earth,	      hid, I see these sights on the earth,	      hid, I see these sights on the earth,	      hid, I see these sights on the earth,
  I see the workings of battle, pestilence, tyranny, I see martyrs and	  I see the workings of battle, pestilence, tyranny, I see martyrs and	  I see the workings of battle, pestilence, tyranny, I see martyrs and	  I see the workings of battle, pestilence, tyranny, I see martyrs and
      prisoners,	      prisoners,	      prisoners,	      prisoners,
  I observe a famine at sea, I observe the sailors casting lots who	  I observe a famine at sea, I observe the sailors casting lots who	  I observe a famine at sea, I observe the sailors casting lots who	  I observe a famine at sea, I observe the sailors casting lots who
      shall be kill'd to preserve the lives of the rest,	      shall be kill'd to preserve the lives of the rest,	      shall be kill'd to preserve the lives of the rest,	      shall be kill'd to preserve the lives of the rest,
  I observe the slights and degradations cast by arrogant persons upon	  I observe the slights and degradations cast by arrogant persons upon	  I observe the slights and degradations cast by arrogant persons upon	  I observe the slights and degradations cast by arrogant persons upon
      laborers, the poor, and upon negroes, and the like;	      laborers, the poor, and upon negroes, and the like;	      laborers, the poor, and upon negroes, and the like;	      laborers, the poor, and upon negroes, and the like;
  All these--all the meanness and agony without end I sitting look out upon,	  All these--all the meanness and agony without end I sitting look out upon,	  All these--all the meanness and agony without end I sitting look out upon,	  All these--all the meanness and agony without end I sitting look out upon,
  See, hear, and am silent.	  See, hear, and am silent.	  See, hear, and am silent.	  See, hear, and am silent.
			
			
			
			
To Rich Givers	To Rich Givers	To Rich Givers	To Rich Givers
			
  What you give me I cheerfully accept,	  What you give me I cheerfully accept,	  What you give me I cheerfully accept,	  What you give me I cheerfully accept,
  A little sustenance, a hut and garden, a little money, as I	  A little sustenance, a hut and garden, a little money, as I	  A little sustenance, a hut and garden, a little money, as I	  A little sustenance, a hut and garden, a little money, as I
      rendezvous with my poems,	      rendezvous with my poems,	      rendezvous with my poems,	      rendezvous with my poems,
  A traveler's lodging and breakfast as journey through the States,--	  A traveler's lodging and breakfast as journey through the States,--	  A traveler's lodging and breakfast as journey through the States,--	  A traveler's lodging and breakfast as journey through the States,--
      why should I be ashamed to own such gifts? why to advertise for them?	      why should I be ashamed to own such gifts? why to advertise for them?	      why should I be ashamed to own such gifts? why to advertise for them?	      why should I be ashamed to own such gifts? why to advertise for them?
  For I myself am not one who bestows nothing upon man and woman,	  For I myself am not one who bestows nothing upon man and woman,	  For I myself am not one who bestows nothing upon man and woman,	  For I myself am not one who bestows nothing upon man and woman,
  For I bestow upon any man or woman the entrance to all the gifts of	  For I bestow upon any man or woman the entrance to all the gifts of	  For I bestow upon any man or woman the entrance to all the gifts of	  For I bestow upon any man or woman the entrance to all the gifts of
      the universe.	      the universe.	      the universe.	      the universe.
			
			
			
			
The Dalliance of the Eagles	The Dalliance of the Eagles	The Dalliance of the Eagles	The Dalliance of the Eagles
			
  Skirting the river road, (my forenoon walk, my rest,)	  Skirting the river road, (my forenoon walk, my rest,)	  Skirting the river road, (my forenoon walk, my rest,)	  Skirting the river road, (my forenoon walk, my rest,)
  Skyward in air a sudden muffled sound, the dalliance of the eagles,	  Skyward in air a sudden muffled sound, the dalliance of the eagles,	  Skyward in air a sudden muffled sound, the dalliance of the eagles,	  Skyward in air a sudden muffled sound, the dalliance of the eagles,
  The rushing amorous contact high in space together,	  The rushing amorous contact high in space together,	  The rushing amorous contact high in space together,	  The rushing amorous contact high in space together,
  The clinching interlocking claws, a living, fierce, gyrating wheel,	  The clinching interlocking claws, a living, fierce, gyrating wheel,	  The clinching interlocking claws, a living, fierce, gyrating wheel,	  The clinching interlocking claws, a living, fierce, gyrating wheel,
  Four beating wings, two beaks, a swirling mass tight grappling,	  Four beating wings, two beaks, a swirling mass tight grappling,	  Four beating wings, two beaks, a swirling mass tight grappling,	  Four beating wings, two beaks, a swirling mass tight grappling,
  In tumbling turning clustering loops, straight downward falling,	  In tumbling turning clustering loops, straight downward falling,	  In tumbling turning clustering loops, straight downward falling,	  In tumbling turning clustering loops, straight downward falling,
  Till o'er the river pois'd, the twain yet one, a moment's lull,	  Till o'er the river pois'd, the twain yet one, a moment's lull,	  Till o'er the river pois'd, the twain yet one, a moment's lull,	  Till o'er the river pois'd, the twain yet one, a moment's lull,
  A motionless still balance in the air, then parting, talons loosing,	  A motionless still balance in the air, then parting, talons loosing,	  A motionless still balance in the air, then parting, talons loosing,	  A motionless still balance in the air, then parting, talons loosing,
  Upward again on slow-firm pinions slanting, their separate diverse flight,	  Upward again on slow-firm pinions slanting, their separate diverse flight,	  Upward again on slow-firm pinions slanting, their separate diverse flight,	  Upward again on slow-firm pinions slanting, their separate diverse flight,
  She hers, he his, pursuing.	  She hers, he his, pursuing.	  She hers, he his, pursuing.	  She hers, he his, pursuing.
			
			
			
			
Roaming in Thought [After reading Hegel]	Roaming in Thought [After reading Hegel]	Roaming in Thought [After reading Hegel]	Roaming in Thought [After reading Hegel]
			
  Roaming in thought over the Universe, I saw the little that is Good	  Roaming in thought over the Universe, I saw the little that is Good	  Roaming in thought over the Universe, I saw the little that is Good	  Roaming in thought over the Universe, I saw the little that is Good
      steadily hastening towards immortality,	      steadily hastening towards immortality,	      steadily hastening towards immortality,	      steadily hastening towards immortality,
  And the vast all that is call'd Evil I saw hastening to merge itself	  And the vast all that is call'd Evil I saw hastening to merge itself	  And the vast all that is call'd Evil I saw hastening to merge itself	  And the vast all that is call'd Evil I saw hastening to merge itself
      and become lost and dead.	      and become lost and dead.	      and become lost and dead.	      and become lost and dead.
			
			
			
			
A Farm Picture	A Farm Picture	A Farm Picture	A Farm Picture
			
  Through the ample open door of the peaceful country barn,	  Through the ample open door of the peaceful country barn,	  Through the ample open door of the peaceful country barn,	  Through the ample open door of the peaceful country barn,
  A sunlit pasture field with cattle and horses feeding,	  A sunlit pasture field with cattle and horses feeding,	  A sunlit pasture field with cattle and horses feeding,	  A sunlit pasture field with cattle and horses feeding,
  And haze and vista, and the far horizon fading away.	  And haze and vista, and the far horizon fading away.	  And haze and vista, and the far horizon fading away.	  And haze and vista, and the far horizon fading away.
			
			
			
			
A Child's Amaze	A Child's Amaze	A Child's Amaze	A Child's Amaze
			
  Silent and amazed even when a little boy,	  Silent and amazed even when a little boy,	  Silent and amazed even when a little boy,	  Silent and amazed even when a little boy,
  I remember I heard the preacher every Sunday put God in his statements,	  I remember I heard the preacher every Sunday put God in his statements,	  I remember I heard the preacher every Sunday put God in his statements,	  I remember I heard the preacher every Sunday put God in his statements,
  As contending against some being or influence.	  As contending against some being or influence.	  As contending against some being or influence.	  As contending against some being or influence.
			
			
			
			
The Runner	The Runner	The Runner	The Runner
			
  On a flat road runs the well-train'd runner,	  On a flat road runs the well-train'd runner,	  On a flat road runs the well-train'd runner,	  On a flat road runs the well-train'd runner,
  He is lean and sinewy with muscular legs,	  He is lean and sinewy with muscular legs,	  He is lean and sinewy with muscular legs,	  He is lean and sinewy with muscular legs,
  He is thinly clothed, he leans forward as he runs,	  He is thinly clothed, he leans forward as he runs,	  He is thinly clothed, he leans forward as he runs,	  He is thinly clothed, he leans forward as he runs,
  With lightly closed fists and arms partially rais'd.	  With lightly closed fists and arms partially rais'd.	  With lightly closed fists and arms partially rais'd.	  With lightly closed fists and arms partially rais'd.
			
			
			
			
Beautiful Women	Beautiful Women	Beautiful Women	Beautiful Women
			
  Women sit or move to and fro, some old, some young,	  Women sit or move to and fro, some old, some young,	  Women sit or move to and fro, some old, some young,	  Women sit or move to and fro, some old, some young,
  The young are beautiful--but the old are more beautiful than the young.	  The young are beautiful--but the old are more beautiful than the young.	  The young are beautiful--but the old are more beautiful than the young.	  The young are beautiful--but the old are more beautiful than the young.
			
			
			
			
Mother and Babe	Mother and Babe	Mother and Babe	Mother and Babe
			
  I see the sleeping babe nestling the breast of its mother,	  I see the sleeping babe nestling the breast of its mother,	  I see the sleeping babe nestling the breast of its mother,	  I see the sleeping babe nestling the breast of its mother,
  The sleeping mother and babe--hush'd, I study them long and long.	  The sleeping mother and babe--hush'd, I study them long and long.	  The sleeping mother and babe--hush'd, I study them long and long.	  The sleeping mother and babe--hush'd, I study them long and long.
			
			
			
			
Thought	Thought	Thought	Thought
			
  Of obedience, faith, adhesiveness;	  Of obedience, faith, adhesiveness;	  Of obedience, faith, adhesiveness;	  Of obedience, faith, adhesiveness;
  As I stand aloof and look there is to me something profoundly	  As I stand aloof and look there is to me something profoundly	  As I stand aloof and look there is to me something profoundly	  As I stand aloof and look there is to me something profoundly
      affecting in large masses of men following the lead of those who	      affecting in large masses of men following the lead of those who	      affecting in large masses of men following the lead of those who	      affecting in large masses of men following the lead of those who
      do not believe in men.	      do not believe in men.	      do not believe in men.	      do not believe in men.
			
			
			
			
Visor'd	Visor'd	Visor'd	Visor'd
			
  A mask, a perpetual natural disguiser of herself,	  A mask, a perpetual natural disguiser of herself,	  A mask, a perpetual natural disguiser of herself,	  A mask, a perpetual natural disguiser of herself,
  Concealing her face, concealing her form,	  Concealing her face, concealing her form,	  Concealing her face, concealing her form,	  Concealing her face, concealing her form,
  Changes and transformations every hour, every moment,	  Changes and transformations every hour, every moment,	  Changes and transformations every hour, every moment,	  Changes and transformations every hour, every moment,
  Falling upon her even when she sleeps.	  Falling upon her even when she sleeps.	  Falling upon her even when she sleeps.	  Falling upon her even when she sleeps.
			
			
			
			
Thought	Thought	Thought	Thought
			
  Of justice--as If could be any thing but the same ample law,	  Of justice--as If could be any thing but the same ample law,	  Of justice--as If could be any thing but the same ample law,	  Of justice--as If could be any thing but the same ample law,
      expounded by natural judges and saviors,	      expounded by natural judges and saviors,	      expounded by natural judges and saviors,	      expounded by natural judges and saviors,
  As if it might be this thing or that thing, according to decisions.	  As if it might be this thing or that thing, according to decisions.	  As if it might be this thing or that thing, according to decisions.	  As if it might be this thing or that thing, according to decisions.
			
			
			
			
Gliding O'er all	Gliding O'er all	Gliding O'er all	Gliding O'er all
			
  Gliding o'er all, through all,	  Gliding o'er all, through all,	  Gliding o'er all, through all,	  Gliding o'er all, through all,
  Through Nature, Time, and Space,	  Through Nature, Time, and Space,	  Through Nature, Time, and Space,	  Through Nature, Time, and Space,
  As a ship on the waters advancing,	  As a ship on the waters advancing,	  As a ship on the waters advancing,	  As a ship on the waters advancing,
  The voyage of the soul--not life alone,	  The voyage of the soul--not life alone,	  The voyage of the soul--not life alone,	  The voyage of the soul--not life alone,
  Death, many deaths I'll sing.	  Death, many deaths I'll sing.	  Death, many deaths I'll sing.	  Death, many deaths I'll sing.
			
			
			
			
Hast Never Come to Thee an Hour	Hast Never Come to Thee an Hour	Hast Never Come to Thee an Hour	Hast Never Come to Thee an Hour
			
  Hast never come to thee an hour,	  Hast never come to thee an hour,	  Hast never come to thee an hour,	  Hast never come to thee an hour,
  A sudden gleam divine, precipitating, bursting all these bubbles,	  A sudden gleam divine, precipitating, bursting all these bubbles,	  A sudden gleam divine, precipitating, bursting all these bubbles,	  A sudden gleam divine, precipitating, bursting all these bubbles,
      fashions, wealth?	      fashions, wealth?	      fashions, wealth?	      fashions, wealth?
  These eager business aims--books, politics, art, amours,	  These eager business aims--books, politics, art, amours,	  These eager business aims--books, politics, art, amours,	  These eager business aims--books, politics, art, amours,
  To utter nothingness?	  To utter nothingness?	  To utter nothingness?	  To utter nothingness?
			
			
			
			
Thought	Thought	Thought	Thought
			
  Of Equality--as if it harm'd me, giving others the same chances and	  Of Equality--as if it harm'd me, giving others the same chances and	  Of Equality--as if it harm'd me, giving others the same chances and	  Of Equality--as if it harm'd me, giving others the same chances and
      rights as myself--as if it were not indispensable to my own	      rights as myself--as if it were not indispensable to my own	      rights as myself--as if it were not indispensable to my own	      rights as myself--as if it were not indispensable to my own
      rights that others possess the same.	      rights that others possess the same.	      rights that others possess the same.	      rights that others possess the same.
			
			
			
			
To Old Age	To Old Age	To Old Age	To Old Age
			
  I see in you the estuary that enlarges and spreads itself grandly as	  I see in you the estuary that enlarges and spreads itself grandly as	  I see in you the estuary that enlarges and spreads itself grandly as	  I see in you the estuary that enlarges and spreads itself grandly as
      it pours in the great sea.	      it pours in the great sea.	      it pours in the great sea.	      it pours in the great sea.
			
			
			
			
Locations and Times	Locations and Times	Locations and Times	Locations and Times
			
  Locations and times--what is it in me that meets them all, whenever	  Locations and times--what is it in me that meets them all, whenever	  Locations and times--what is it in me that meets them all, whenever	  Locations and times--what is it in me that meets them all, whenever
      and wherever, and makes me at home?	      and wherever, and makes me at home?	      and wherever, and makes me at home?	      and wherever, and makes me at home?
  Forms, colors, densities, odors--what is it in me that corresponds	  Forms, colors, densities, odors--what is it in me that corresponds	  Forms, colors, densities, odors--what is it in me that corresponds	  Forms, colors, densities, odors--what is it in me that corresponds
      with them?	      with them?	      with them?	      with them?
			
			
			
			
Offerings	Offerings	Offerings	Offerings
			
  A thousand perfect men and women appear,	  A thousand perfect men and women appear,	  A thousand perfect men and women appear,	  A thousand perfect men and women appear,
  Around each gathers a cluster of friends, and gay children and	  Around each gathers a cluster of friends, and gay children and	  Around each gathers a cluster of friends, and gay children and	  Around each gathers a cluster of friends, and gay children and
      youths, with offerings.	      youths, with offerings.	      youths, with offerings.	      youths, with offerings.
			
			
			
			
To The States [To Identify the 16th, 17th, or 18th Presidentiad]	To The States [To Identify the 16th, 17th, or 18th Presidentiad]	To The States [To Identify the 16th, 17th, or 18th Presidentiad]	To The States [To Identify the 16th, 17th, or 18th Presidentiad]
			
  Why reclining, interrogating? why myself and all drowsing?	  Why reclining, interrogating? why myself and all drowsing?	  Why reclining, interrogating? why myself and all drowsing?	  Why reclining, interrogating? why myself and all drowsing?
  What deepening twilight-scum floating atop of the waters,	  What deepening twilight-scum floating atop of the waters,	  What deepening twilight-scum floating atop of the waters,	  What deepening twilight-scum floating atop of the waters,
  Who are they as bats and night-dogs askant in the capitol?	  Who are they as bats and night-dogs askant in the capitol?	  Who are they as bats and night-dogs askant in the capitol?	  Who are they as bats and night-dogs askant in the capitol?
  What a filthy Presidentiad! (O South, your torrid suns! O North,	  What a filthy Presidentiad! (O South, your torrid suns! O North,	  What a filthy Presidentiad! (O South, your torrid suns! O North,	  What a filthy Presidentiad! (O South, your torrid suns! O North,
      your arctic freezings!)	      your arctic freezings!)	      your arctic freezings!)	      your arctic freezings!)
  Are those really Congressmen? are those the great Judges? is that	  Are those really Congressmen? are those the great Judges? is that	  Are those really Congressmen? are those the great Judges? is that	  Are those really Congressmen? are those the great Judges? is that
      the President?	      the President?	      the President?	      the President?
  Then I will sleep awhile yet, for I see that these States sleep, for	  Then I will sleep awhile yet, for I see that these States sleep, for	  Then I will sleep awhile yet, for I see that these States sleep, for	  Then I will sleep awhile yet, for I see that these States sleep, for
      reasons;	      reasons;	      reasons;	      reasons;
  (With gathering murk, with muttering thunder and lambent shoots we	  (With gathering murk, with muttering thunder and lambent shoots we	  (With gathering murk, with muttering thunder and lambent shoots we	  (With gathering murk, with muttering thunder and lambent shoots we
      all duly awake,	      all duly awake,	      all duly awake,	      all duly awake,
  South, North, East, West, inland and seaboard, we will surely awake.)	  South, North, East, West, inland and seaboard, we will surely awake.)	  South, North, East, West, inland and seaboard, we will surely awake.)	  South, North, East, West, inland and seaboard, we will surely awake.)
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXI.  DRUM-TAPS	BOOK XXI.  DRUM-TAPS	BOOK XXI.  DRUM-TAPS	BOOK XXI.  DRUM-TAPS
			
			
First O Songs for a Prelude	First O Songs for a Prelude	First O Songs for a Prelude	First O Songs for a Prelude
			
  First O songs for a prelude,	  First O songs for a prelude,	  First O songs for a prelude,	  First O songs for a prelude,
  Lightly strike on the stretch'd tympanum pride and joy in my city,	  Lightly strike on the stretch'd tympanum pride and joy in my city,	  Lightly strike on the stretch'd tympanum pride and joy in my city,	  Lightly strike on the stretch'd tympanum pride and joy in my city,
  How she led the rest to arms, how she gave the cue,	  How she led the rest to arms, how she gave the cue,	  How she led the rest to arms, how she gave the cue,	  How she led the rest to arms, how she gave the cue,
  How at once with lithe limbs unwaiting a moment she sprang,	  How at once with lithe limbs unwaiting a moment she sprang,	  How at once with lithe limbs unwaiting a moment she sprang,	  How at once with lithe limbs unwaiting a moment she sprang,
  (O superb! O Manhattan, my own, my peerless!	  (O superb! O Manhattan, my own, my peerless!	  (O superb! O Manhattan, my own, my peerless!	  (O superb! O Manhattan, my own, my peerless!
  O strongest you in the hour of danger, in crisis! O truer than steel!)	  O strongest you in the hour of danger, in crisis! O truer than steel!)	  O strongest you in the hour of danger, in crisis! O truer than steel!)	  O strongest you in the hour of danger, in crisis! O truer than steel!)
  How you sprang--how you threw off the costumes of peace with	  How you sprang--how you threw off the costumes of peace with	  How you sprang--how you threw off the costumes of peace with	  How you sprang--how you threw off the costumes of peace with
      indifferent hand,	      indifferent hand,	      indifferent hand,	      indifferent hand,
  How your soft opera-music changed, and the drum and fife were heard	  How your soft opera-music changed, and the drum and fife were heard	  How your soft opera-music changed, and the drum and fife were heard	  How your soft opera-music changed, and the drum and fife were heard
      in their stead,	      in their stead,	      in their stead,	      in their stead,
  How you led to the war, (that shall serve for our prelude, songs of	  How you led to the war, (that shall serve for our prelude, songs of	  How you led to the war, (that shall serve for our prelude, songs of	  How you led to the war, (that shall serve for our prelude, songs of
      soldiers,)	      soldiers,)	      soldiers,)	      soldiers,)
  How Manhattan drum-taps led.	  How Manhattan drum-taps led.	  How Manhattan drum-taps led.	  How Manhattan drum-taps led.
			
  Forty years had I in my city seen soldiers parading,	  Forty years had I in my city seen soldiers parading,	  Forty years had I in my city seen soldiers parading,	  Forty years had I in my city seen soldiers parading,
  Forty years as a pageant, till unawares the lady of this teeming and	  Forty years as a pageant, till unawares the lady of this teeming and	  Forty years as a pageant, till unawares the lady of this teeming and	  Forty years as a pageant, till unawares the lady of this teeming and
      turbulent city,	      turbulent city,	      turbulent city,	      turbulent city,
  Sleepless amid her ships, her houses, her incalculable wealth,	  Sleepless amid her ships, her houses, her incalculable wealth,	  Sleepless amid her ships, her houses, her incalculable wealth,	  Sleepless amid her ships, her houses, her incalculable wealth,
  With her million children around her, suddenly,	  With her million children around her, suddenly,	  With her million children around her, suddenly,	  With her million children around her, suddenly,
  At dead of night, at news from the south,	  At dead of night, at news from the south,	  At dead of night, at news from the south,	  At dead of night, at news from the south,
  Incens'd struck with clinch'd hand the pavement.	  Incens'd struck with clinch'd hand the pavement.	  Incens'd struck with clinch'd hand the pavement.	  Incens'd struck with clinch'd hand the pavement.
			
  A shock electric, the night sustain'd it,	  A shock electric, the night sustain'd it,	  A shock electric, the night sustain'd it,	  A shock electric, the night sustain'd it,
  Till with ominous hum our hive at daybreak pour'd out its myriads.	  Till with ominous hum our hive at daybreak pour'd out its myriads.	  Till with ominous hum our hive at daybreak pour'd out its myriads.	  Till with ominous hum our hive at daybreak pour'd out its myriads.
			
  From the houses then and the workshops, and through all the doorways,	  From the houses then and the workshops, and through all the doorways,	  From the houses then and the workshops, and through all the doorways,	  From the houses then and the workshops, and through all the doorways,
  Leapt they tumultuous, and lo! Manhattan arming.	  Leapt they tumultuous, and lo! Manhattan arming.	  Leapt they tumultuous, and lo! Manhattan arming.	  Leapt they tumultuous, and lo! Manhattan arming.
			
  To the drum-taps prompt,	  To the drum-taps prompt,	  To the drum-taps prompt,	  To the drum-taps prompt,
  The young men falling in and arming,	  The young men falling in and arming,	  The young men falling in and arming,	  The young men falling in and arming,
  The mechanics arming, (the trowel, the jack-plane, the blacksmith's	  The mechanics arming, (the trowel, the jack-plane, the blacksmith's	  The mechanics arming, (the trowel, the jack-plane, the blacksmith's	  The mechanics arming, (the trowel, the jack-plane, the blacksmith's
      hammer, tost aside with precipitation,)	      hammer, tost aside with precipitation,)	      hammer, tost aside with precipitation,)	      hammer, tost aside with precipitation,)
  The lawyer leaving his office and arming, the judge leaving the court,	  The lawyer leaving his office and arming, the judge leaving the court,	  The lawyer leaving his office and arming, the judge leaving the court,	  The lawyer leaving his office and arming, the judge leaving the court,
  The driver deserting his wagon in the street, jumping down, throwing	  The driver deserting his wagon in the street, jumping down, throwing	  The driver deserting his wagon in the street, jumping down, throwing	  The driver deserting his wagon in the street, jumping down, throwing
      the reins abruptly down on the horses' backs,	      the reins abruptly down on the horses' backs,	      the reins abruptly down on the horses' backs,	      the reins abruptly down on the horses' backs,
  The salesman leaving the store, the boss, book-keeper, porter, all leaving;	  The salesman leaving the store, the boss, book-keeper, porter, all leaving;	  The salesman leaving the store, the boss, book-keeper, porter, all leaving;	  The salesman leaving the store, the boss, book-keeper, porter, all leaving;
  Squads gather everywhere by common consent and arm,	  Squads gather everywhere by common consent and arm,	  Squads gather everywhere by common consent and arm,	  Squads gather everywhere by common consent and arm,
  The new recruits, even boys, the old men show them how to wear their	  The new recruits, even boys, the old men show them how to wear their	  The new recruits, even boys, the old men show them how to wear their	  The new recruits, even boys, the old men show them how to wear their
      accoutrements, they buckle the straps carefully,	      accoutrements, they buckle the straps carefully,	      accoutrements, they buckle the straps carefully,	      accoutrements, they buckle the straps carefully,
  Outdoors arming, indoors arming, the flash of the musket-barrels,	  Outdoors arming, indoors arming, the flash of the musket-barrels,	  Outdoors arming, indoors arming, the flash of the musket-barrels,	  Outdoors arming, indoors arming, the flash of the musket-barrels,
  The white tents cluster in camps, the arm'd sentries around, the	  The white tents cluster in camps, the arm'd sentries around, the	  The white tents cluster in camps, the arm'd sentries around, the	  The white tents cluster in camps, the arm'd sentries around, the
      sunrise cannon and again at sunset,	      sunrise cannon and again at sunset,	      sunrise cannon and again at sunset,	      sunrise cannon and again at sunset,
  Arm'd regiments arrive every day, pass through the city, and embark	  Arm'd regiments arrive every day, pass through the city, and embark	  Arm'd regiments arrive every day, pass through the city, and embark	  Arm'd regiments arrive every day, pass through the city, and embark
      from the wharves,	      from the wharves,	      from the wharves,	      from the wharves,
  (How good they look as they tramp down to the river, sweaty, with	  (How good they look as they tramp down to the river, sweaty, with	  (How good they look as they tramp down to the river, sweaty, with	  (How good they look as they tramp down to the river, sweaty, with
      their guns on their shoulders!	      their guns on their shoulders!	      their guns on their shoulders!	      their guns on their shoulders!
  How I love them! how I could hug them, with their brown faces and	  How I love them! how I could hug them, with their brown faces and	  How I love them! how I could hug them, with their brown faces and	  How I love them! how I could hug them, with their brown faces and
      their clothes and knapsacks cover'd with dust!)	      their clothes and knapsacks cover'd with dust!)	      their clothes and knapsacks cover'd with dust!)	      their clothes and knapsacks cover'd with dust!)
  The blood of the city up-arm'd! arm'd! the cry everywhere,	  The blood of the city up-arm'd! arm'd! the cry everywhere,	  The blood of the city up-arm'd! arm'd! the cry everywhere,	  The blood of the city up-arm'd! arm'd! the cry everywhere,
  The flags flung out from the steeples of churches and from all the	  The flags flung out from the steeples of churches and from all the	  The flags flung out from the steeples of churches and from all the	  The flags flung out from the steeples of churches and from all the
      public buildings and stores,	      public buildings and stores,	      public buildings and stores,	      public buildings and stores,
  The tearful parting, the mother kisses her son, the son kisses his mother,	  The tearful parting, the mother kisses her son, the son kisses his mother,	  The tearful parting, the mother kisses her son, the son kisses his mother,	  The tearful parting, the mother kisses her son, the son kisses his mother,
  (Loth is the mother to part, yet not a word does she speak to detain him,)	  (Loth is the mother to part, yet not a word does she speak to detain him,)	  (Loth is the mother to part, yet not a word does she speak to detain him,)	  (Loth is the mother to part, yet not a word does she speak to detain him,)
  The tumultuous escort, the ranks of policemen preceding, clearing the way,	  The tumultuous escort, the ranks of policemen preceding, clearing the way,	  The tumultuous escort, the ranks of policemen preceding, clearing the way,	  The tumultuous escort, the ranks of policemen preceding, clearing the way,
  The unpent enthusiasm, the wild cheers of the crowd for their favorites,	  The unpent enthusiasm, the wild cheers of the crowd for their favorites,	  The unpent enthusiasm, the wild cheers of the crowd for their favorites,	  The unpent enthusiasm, the wild cheers of the crowd for their favorites,
  The artillery, the silent cannons bright as gold, drawn along,	  The artillery, the silent cannons bright as gold, drawn along,	  The artillery, the silent cannons bright as gold, drawn along,	  The artillery, the silent cannons bright as gold, drawn along,
      rumble lightly over the stones,	      rumble lightly over the stones,	      rumble lightly over the stones,	      rumble lightly over the stones,
  (Silent cannons, soon to cease your silence,	  (Silent cannons, soon to cease your silence,	  (Silent cannons, soon to cease your silence,	  (Silent cannons, soon to cease your silence,
  Soon unlimber'd to begin the red business;)	  Soon unlimber'd to begin the red business;)	  Soon unlimber'd to begin the red business;)	  Soon unlimber'd to begin the red business;)
  All the mutter of preparation, all the determin'd arming,	  All the mutter of preparation, all the determin'd arming,	  All the mutter of preparation, all the determin'd arming,	  All the mutter of preparation, all the determin'd arming,
  The hospital service, the lint, bandages and medicines,	  The hospital service, the lint, bandages and medicines,	  The hospital service, the lint, bandages and medicines,	  The hospital service, the lint, bandages and medicines,
  The women volunteering for nurses, the work begun for in earnest, no	  The women volunteering for nurses, the work begun for in earnest, no	  The women volunteering for nurses, the work begun for in earnest, no	  The women volunteering for nurses, the work begun for in earnest, no
      mere parade now;	      mere parade now;	      mere parade now;	      mere parade now;
  War! an arm'd race is advancing! the welcome for battle, no turning away!	  War! an arm'd race is advancing! the welcome for battle, no turning away!	  War! an arm'd race is advancing! the welcome for battle, no turning away!	  War! an arm'd race is advancing! the welcome for battle, no turning away!
  War! be it weeks, months, or years, an arm'd race is advancing to	  War! be it weeks, months, or years, an arm'd race is advancing to	  War! be it weeks, months, or years, an arm'd race is advancing to	  War! be it weeks, months, or years, an arm'd race is advancing to
      welcome it.	      welcome it.	      welcome it.	      welcome it.
			
  Mannahatta a-march--and it's O to sing it well!	  Mannahatta a-march--and it's O to sing it well!	  Mannahatta a-march--and it's O to sing it well!	  Mannahatta a-march--and it's O to sing it well!
  It's O for a manly life in the camp.	  It's O for a manly life in the camp.	  It's O for a manly life in the camp.	  It's O for a manly life in the camp.
			
  And the sturdy artillery,	  And the sturdy artillery,	  And the sturdy artillery,	  And the sturdy artillery,
  The guns bright as gold, the work for giants, to serve well the guns,	  The guns bright as gold, the work for giants, to serve well the guns,	  The guns bright as gold, the work for giants, to serve well the guns,	  The guns bright as gold, the work for giants, to serve well the guns,
  Unlimber them! (no more as the past forty years for salutes for	  Unlimber them! (no more as the past forty years for salutes for	  Unlimber them! (no more as the past forty years for salutes for	  Unlimber them! (no more as the past forty years for salutes for
      courtesies merely,	      courtesies merely,	      courtesies merely,	      courtesies merely,
  Put in something now besides powder and wadding.)	  Put in something now besides powder and wadding.)	  Put in something now besides powder and wadding.)	  Put in something now besides powder and wadding.)
			
  And you lady of ships, you Mannahatta,	  And you lady of ships, you Mannahatta,	  And you lady of ships, you Mannahatta,	  And you lady of ships, you Mannahatta,
  Old matron of this proud, friendly, turbulent city,	  Old matron of this proud, friendly, turbulent city,	  Old matron of this proud, friendly, turbulent city,	  Old matron of this proud, friendly, turbulent city,
  Often in peace and wealth you were pensive or covertly frown'd amid	  Often in peace and wealth you were pensive or covertly frown'd amid	  Often in peace and wealth you were pensive or covertly frown'd amid	  Often in peace and wealth you were pensive or covertly frown'd amid
      all your children,	      all your children,	      all your children,	      all your children,
  But now you smile with joy exulting old Mannahatta.	  But now you smile with joy exulting old Mannahatta.	  But now you smile with joy exulting old Mannahatta.	  But now you smile with joy exulting old Mannahatta.
			
			
			
			
Eighteen Sixty-One	Eighteen Sixty-One	Eighteen Sixty-One	Eighteen Sixty-One
			
  Arm'd year--year of the struggle,	  Arm'd year--year of the struggle,	  Arm'd year--year of the struggle,	  Arm'd year--year of the struggle,
  No dainty rhymes or sentimental love verses for you terrible year,	  No dainty rhymes or sentimental love verses for you terrible year,	  No dainty rhymes or sentimental love verses for you terrible year,	  No dainty rhymes or sentimental love verses for you terrible year,
  Not you as some pale poetling seated at a desk lisping cadenzas piano,	  Not you as some pale poetling seated at a desk lisping cadenzas piano,	  Not you as some pale poetling seated at a desk lisping cadenzas piano,	  Not you as some pale poetling seated at a desk lisping cadenzas piano,
  But as a strong man erect, clothed in blue clothes, advancing,	  But as a strong man erect, clothed in blue clothes, advancing,	  But as a strong man erect, clothed in blue clothes, advancing,	  But as a strong man erect, clothed in blue clothes, advancing,
      carrying rifle on your shoulder,	      carrying rifle on your shoulder,	      carrying rifle on your shoulder,	      carrying rifle on your shoulder,
  With well-gristled body and sunburnt face and hands, with a knife in	  With well-gristled body and sunburnt face and hands, with a knife in	  With well-gristled body and sunburnt face and hands, with a knife in	  With well-gristled body and sunburnt face and hands, with a knife in
      the belt at your side,	      the belt at your side,	      the belt at your side,	      the belt at your side,
  As I heard you shouting loud, your sonorous voice ringing across the	  As I heard you shouting loud, your sonorous voice ringing across the	  As I heard you shouting loud, your sonorous voice ringing across the	  As I heard you shouting loud, your sonorous voice ringing across the
      continent,	      continent,	      continent,	      continent,
  Your masculine voice O year, as rising amid the great cities,	  Your masculine voice O year, as rising amid the great cities,	  Your masculine voice O year, as rising amid the great cities,	  Your masculine voice O year, as rising amid the great cities,
  Amid the men of Manhattan I saw you as one of the workmen, the	  Amid the men of Manhattan I saw you as one of the workmen, the	  Amid the men of Manhattan I saw you as one of the workmen, the	  Amid the men of Manhattan I saw you as one of the workmen, the
      dwellers in Manhattan,	      dwellers in Manhattan,	      dwellers in Manhattan,	      dwellers in Manhattan,
  Or with large steps crossing the prairies out of Illinois and Indiana,	  Or with large steps crossing the prairies out of Illinois and Indiana,	  Or with large steps crossing the prairies out of Illinois and Indiana,	  Or with large steps crossing the prairies out of Illinois and Indiana,
  Rapidly crossing the West with springy gait and descending the Allghanies,	  Rapidly crossing the West with springy gait and descending the Allghanies,	  Rapidly crossing the West with springy gait and descending the Allghanies,	  Rapidly crossing the West with springy gait and descending the Allghanies,
  Or down from the great lakes or in Pennsylvania, or on deck along	  Or down from the great lakes or in Pennsylvania, or on deck along	  Or down from the great lakes or in Pennsylvania, or on deck along	  Or down from the great lakes or in Pennsylvania, or on deck along
      the Ohio river,	      the Ohio river,	      the Ohio river,	      the Ohio river,
  Or southward along the Tennessee or Cumberland rivers, or at	  Or southward along the Tennessee or Cumberland rivers, or at	  Or southward along the Tennessee or Cumberland rivers, or at	  Or southward along the Tennessee or Cumberland rivers, or at
      Chattanooga on the mountain top,	      Chattanooga on the mountain top,	      Chattanooga on the mountain top,	      Chattanooga on the mountain top,
  Saw I your gait and saw I your sinewy limbs clothed in blue, bearing	  Saw I your gait and saw I your sinewy limbs clothed in blue, bearing	  Saw I your gait and saw I your sinewy limbs clothed in blue, bearing	  Saw I your gait and saw I your sinewy limbs clothed in blue, bearing
      weapons, robust year,	      weapons, robust year,	      weapons, robust year,	      weapons, robust year,
  Heard your determin'd voice launch'd forth again and again,	  Heard your determin'd voice launch'd forth again and again,	  Heard your determin'd voice launch'd forth again and again,	  Heard your determin'd voice launch'd forth again and again,
  Year that suddenly sang by the mouths of the round-lipp'd cannon,	  Year that suddenly sang by the mouths of the round-lipp'd cannon,	  Year that suddenly sang by the mouths of the round-lipp'd cannon,	  Year that suddenly sang by the mouths of the round-lipp'd cannon,
  I repeat you, hurrying, crashing, sad, distracted year.	  I repeat you, hurrying, crashing, sad, distracted year.	  I repeat you, hurrying, crashing, sad, distracted year.	  I repeat you, hurrying, crashing, sad, distracted year.
			
			
			
			
Beat! Beat! Drums!	Beat! Beat! Drums!	Beat! Beat! Drums!	Beat! Beat! Drums!
			
  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!
  Through the windows--through doors--burst like a ruthless force,	  Through the windows--through doors--burst like a ruthless force,	  Through the windows--through doors--burst like a ruthless force,	  Through the windows--through doors--burst like a ruthless force,
  Into the solemn church, and scatter the congregation,	  Into the solemn church, and scatter the congregation,	  Into the solemn church, and scatter the congregation,	  Into the solemn church, and scatter the congregation,
  Into the school where the scholar is studying;	  Into the school where the scholar is studying;	  Into the school where the scholar is studying;	  Into the school where the scholar is studying;
  Leave not the bridegroom quiet--no happiness must he have now with	  Leave not the bridegroom quiet--no happiness must he have now with	  Leave not the bridegroom quiet--no happiness must he have now with	  Leave not the bridegroom quiet--no happiness must he have now with
      his bride,	      his bride,	      his bride,	      his bride,
  Nor the peaceful farmer any peace, ploughing his field or gathering	  Nor the peaceful farmer any peace, ploughing his field or gathering	  Nor the peaceful farmer any peace, ploughing his field or gathering	  Nor the peaceful farmer any peace, ploughing his field or gathering
      his grain,	      his grain,	      his grain,	      his grain,
  So fierce you whirr and pound you drums--so shrill you bugles blow.	  So fierce you whirr and pound you drums--so shrill you bugles blow.	  So fierce you whirr and pound you drums--so shrill you bugles blow.	  So fierce you whirr and pound you drums--so shrill you bugles blow.
			
  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!
  Over the traffic of cities--over the rumble of wheels in the streets;	  Over the traffic of cities--over the rumble of wheels in the streets;	  Over the traffic of cities--over the rumble of wheels in the streets;	  Over the traffic of cities--over the rumble of wheels in the streets;
  Are beds prepared for sleepers at night in the houses? no sleepers	  Are beds prepared for sleepers at night in the houses? no sleepers	  Are beds prepared for sleepers at night in the houses? no sleepers	  Are beds prepared for sleepers at night in the houses? no sleepers
      must sleep in those beds,	      must sleep in those beds,	      must sleep in those beds,	      must sleep in those beds,
  No bargainers' bargains by day--no brokers or speculators--would	  No bargainers' bargains by day--no brokers or speculators--would	  No bargainers' bargains by day--no brokers or speculators--would	  No bargainers' bargains by day--no brokers or speculators--would
      they continue?	      they continue?	      they continue?	      they continue?
  Would the talkers be talking? would the singer attempt to sing?	  Would the talkers be talking? would the singer attempt to sing?	  Would the talkers be talking? would the singer attempt to sing?	  Would the talkers be talking? would the singer attempt to sing?
  Would the lawyer rise in the court to state his case before the judge?	  Would the lawyer rise in the court to state his case before the judge?	  Would the lawyer rise in the court to state his case before the judge?	  Would the lawyer rise in the court to state his case before the judge?
  Then rattle quicker, heavier drums--you bugles wilder blow.	  Then rattle quicker, heavier drums--you bugles wilder blow.	  Then rattle quicker, heavier drums--you bugles wilder blow.	  Then rattle quicker, heavier drums--you bugles wilder blow.
			
  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!	  Beat! beat! drums!--blow! bugles! blow!
  Make no parley--stop for no expostulation,	  Make no parley--stop for no expostulation,	  Make no parley--stop for no expostulation,	  Make no parley--stop for no expostulation,
  Mind not the timid--mind not the weeper or prayer,	  Mind not the timid--mind not the weeper or prayer,	  Mind not the timid--mind not the weeper or prayer,	  Mind not the timid--mind not the weeper or prayer,
  Mind not the old man beseeching the young man,	  Mind not the old man beseeching the young man,	  Mind not the old man beseeching the young man,	  Mind not the old man beseeching the young man,
  Let not the child's voice be heard, nor the mother's entreaties,	  Let not the child's voice be heard, nor the mother's entreaties,	  Let not the child's voice be heard, nor the mother's entreaties,	  Let not the child's voice be heard, nor the mother's entreaties,
  Make even the trestles to shake the dead where they lie awaiting the	  Make even the trestles to shake the dead where they lie awaiting the	  Make even the trestles to shake the dead where they lie awaiting the	  Make even the trestles to shake the dead where they lie awaiting the
      hearses,	      hearses,	      hearses,	      hearses,
  So strong you thump O terrible drums--so loud you bugles blow.	  So strong you thump O terrible drums--so loud you bugles blow.	  So strong you thump O terrible drums--so loud you bugles blow.	  So strong you thump O terrible drums--so loud you bugles blow.
			
			
			
			
From Paumanok Starting I Fly Like a Bird	From Paumanok Starting I Fly Like a Bird	From Paumanok Starting I Fly Like a Bird	From Paumanok Starting I Fly Like a Bird
			
  From Paumanok starting I fly like a bird,	  From Paumanok starting I fly like a bird,	  From Paumanok starting I fly like a bird,	  From Paumanok starting I fly like a bird,
  Around and around to soar to sing the idea of all,	  Around and around to soar to sing the idea of all,	  Around and around to soar to sing the idea of all,	  Around and around to soar to sing the idea of all,
  To the north betaking myself to sing there arctic songs,	  To the north betaking myself to sing there arctic songs,	  To the north betaking myself to sing there arctic songs,	  To the north betaking myself to sing there arctic songs,
  To Kanada till I absorb Kanada in myself, to Michigan then,	  To Kanada till I absorb Kanada in myself, to Michigan then,	  To Kanada till I absorb Kanada in myself, to Michigan then,	  To Kanada till I absorb Kanada in myself, to Michigan then,
  To Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, to sing their songs, (they are inimitable;)	  To Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, to sing their songs, (they are inimitable;)	  To Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, to sing their songs, (they are inimitable;)	  To Wisconsin, Iowa, Minnesota, to sing their songs, (they are inimitable;)
  Then to Ohio and Indiana to sing theirs, to Missouri and Kansas and	  Then to Ohio and Indiana to sing theirs, to Missouri and Kansas and	  Then to Ohio and Indiana to sing theirs, to Missouri and Kansas and	  Then to Ohio and Indiana to sing theirs, to Missouri and Kansas and
      Arkansas to sing theirs,	      Arkansas to sing theirs,	      Arkansas to sing theirs,	      Arkansas to sing theirs,
  To Tennessee and Kentucky, to the Carolinas and Georgia to sing theirs,	  To Tennessee and Kentucky, to the Carolinas and Georgia to sing theirs,	  To Tennessee and Kentucky, to the Carolinas and Georgia to sing theirs,	  To Tennessee and Kentucky, to the Carolinas and Georgia to sing theirs,
  To Texas and so along up toward California, to roam accepted everywhere;	  To Texas and so along up toward California, to roam accepted everywhere;	  To Texas and so along up toward California, to roam accepted everywhere;	  To Texas and so along up toward California, to roam accepted everywhere;
  To sing first, (to the tap of the war-drum if need be,)	  To sing first, (to the tap of the war-drum if need be,)	  To sing first, (to the tap of the war-drum if need be,)	  To sing first, (to the tap of the war-drum if need be,)
  The idea of all, of the Western world one and inseparable,	  The idea of all, of the Western world one and inseparable,	  The idea of all, of the Western world one and inseparable,	  The idea of all, of the Western world one and inseparable,
  And then the song of each member of these States.	  And then the song of each member of these States.	  And then the song of each member of these States.	  And then the song of each member of these States.
			
			
			
			
Song of the Banner at Daybreak	Song of the Banner at Daybreak	Song of the Banner at Daybreak	Song of the Banner at Daybreak
			
       Poet:	       Poet:	       Poet:	       Poet:
  O A new song, a free song,	  O A new song, a free song,	  O A new song, a free song,	  O A new song, a free song,
  Flapping, flapping, flapping, flapping, by sounds, by voices clearer,	  Flapping, flapping, flapping, flapping, by sounds, by voices clearer,	  Flapping, flapping, flapping, flapping, by sounds, by voices clearer,	  Flapping, flapping, flapping, flapping, by sounds, by voices clearer,
  By the wind's voice and that of the drum,	  By the wind's voice and that of the drum,	  By the wind's voice and that of the drum,	  By the wind's voice and that of the drum,
  By the banner's voice and child's voice and sea's voice and father's voice,	  By the banner's voice and child's voice and sea's voice and father's voice,	  By the banner's voice and child's voice and sea's voice and father's voice,	  By the banner's voice and child's voice and sea's voice and father's voice,
  Low on the ground and high in the air,	  Low on the ground and high in the air,	  Low on the ground and high in the air,	  Low on the ground and high in the air,
  On the ground where father and child stand,	  On the ground where father and child stand,	  On the ground where father and child stand,	  On the ground where father and child stand,
  In the upward air where their eyes turn,	  In the upward air where their eyes turn,	  In the upward air where their eyes turn,	  In the upward air where their eyes turn,
  Where the banner at daybreak is flapping.	  Where the banner at daybreak is flapping.	  Where the banner at daybreak is flapping.	  Where the banner at daybreak is flapping.
			
  Words! book-words! what are you?	  Words! book-words! what are you?	  Words! book-words! what are you?	  Words! book-words! what are you?
  Words no more, for hearken and see,	  Words no more, for hearken and see,	  Words no more, for hearken and see,	  Words no more, for hearken and see,
  My song is there in the open air, and I must sing,	  My song is there in the open air, and I must sing,	  My song is there in the open air, and I must sing,	  My song is there in the open air, and I must sing,
  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.	  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.	  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.	  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.
			
  I'll weave the chord and twine in,	  I'll weave the chord and twine in,	  I'll weave the chord and twine in,	  I'll weave the chord and twine in,
  Man's desire and babe's desire, I'll twine them in, I'll put in life,	  Man's desire and babe's desire, I'll twine them in, I'll put in life,	  Man's desire and babe's desire, I'll twine them in, I'll put in life,	  Man's desire and babe's desire, I'll twine them in, I'll put in life,
  I'll put the bayonet's flashing point, I'll let bullets and slugs whizz,	  I'll put the bayonet's flashing point, I'll let bullets and slugs whizz,	  I'll put the bayonet's flashing point, I'll let bullets and slugs whizz,	  I'll put the bayonet's flashing point, I'll let bullets and slugs whizz,
  (As one carrying a symbol and menace far into the future,	  (As one carrying a symbol and menace far into the future,	  (As one carrying a symbol and menace far into the future,	  (As one carrying a symbol and menace far into the future,
  Crying with trumpet voice, Arouse and beware! Beware and arouse!)	  Crying with trumpet voice, Arouse and beware! Beware and arouse!)	  Crying with trumpet voice, Arouse and beware! Beware and arouse!)	  Crying with trumpet voice, Arouse and beware! Beware and arouse!)
  I'll pour the verse with streams of blood, full of volition, full of joy,	  I'll pour the verse with streams of blood, full of volition, full of joy,	  I'll pour the verse with streams of blood, full of volition, full of joy,	  I'll pour the verse with streams of blood, full of volition, full of joy,
  Then loosen, launch forth, to go and compete,	  Then loosen, launch forth, to go and compete,	  Then loosen, launch forth, to go and compete,	  Then loosen, launch forth, to go and compete,
  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.	  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.	  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.	  With the banner and pennant a-flapping.
			
       Pennant:	       Pennant:	       Pennant:	       Pennant:
  Come up here, bard, bard,	  Come up here, bard, bard,	  Come up here, bard, bard,	  Come up here, bard, bard,
  Come up here, soul, soul,	  Come up here, soul, soul,	  Come up here, soul, soul,	  Come up here, soul, soul,
  Come up here, dear little child,	  Come up here, dear little child,	  Come up here, dear little child,	  Come up here, dear little child,
  To fly in the clouds and winds with me, and play with the measureless light.	  To fly in the clouds and winds with me, and play with the measureless light.	  To fly in the clouds and winds with me, and play with the measureless light.	  To fly in the clouds and winds with me, and play with the measureless light.
			
       Child:	       Child:	       Child:	       Child:
  Father what is that in the sky beckoning to me with long finger?	  Father what is that in the sky beckoning to me with long finger?	  Father what is that in the sky beckoning to me with long finger?	  Father what is that in the sky beckoning to me with long finger?
  And what does it say to me all the while?	  And what does it say to me all the while?	  And what does it say to me all the while?	  And what does it say to me all the while?
			
       Father:	       Father:	       Father:	       Father:
  Nothing my babe you see in the sky,	  Nothing my babe you see in the sky,	  Nothing my babe you see in the sky,	  Nothing my babe you see in the sky,
  And nothing at all to you it says--but look you my babe,	  And nothing at all to you it says--but look you my babe,	  And nothing at all to you it says--but look you my babe,	  And nothing at all to you it says--but look you my babe,
  Look at these dazzling things in the houses, and see you the money-	  Look at these dazzling things in the houses, and see you the money-	  Look at these dazzling things in the houses, and see you the money-	  Look at these dazzling things in the houses, and see you the money-
      shops opening,	      shops opening,	      shops opening,	      shops opening,
  And see you the vehicles preparing to crawl along the streets with goods;	  And see you the vehicles preparing to crawl along the streets with goods;	  And see you the vehicles preparing to crawl along the streets with goods;	  And see you the vehicles preparing to crawl along the streets with goods;
  These, ah these, how valued and toil'd for these!	  These, ah these, how valued and toil'd for these!	  These, ah these, how valued and toil'd for these!	  These, ah these, how valued and toil'd for these!
  How envied by all the earth.	  How envied by all the earth.	  How envied by all the earth.	  How envied by all the earth.
			
       Poet:	       Poet:	       Poet:	       Poet:
  Fresh and rosy red the sun is mounting high,	  Fresh and rosy red the sun is mounting high,	  Fresh and rosy red the sun is mounting high,	  Fresh and rosy red the sun is mounting high,
  On floats the sea in distant blue careering through its channels,	  On floats the sea in distant blue careering through its channels,	  On floats the sea in distant blue careering through its channels,	  On floats the sea in distant blue careering through its channels,
  On floats the wind over the breast of the sea setting in toward land,	  On floats the wind over the breast of the sea setting in toward land,	  On floats the wind over the breast of the sea setting in toward land,	  On floats the wind over the breast of the sea setting in toward land,
  The great steady wind from west or west-by-south,	  The great steady wind from west or west-by-south,	  The great steady wind from west or west-by-south,	  The great steady wind from west or west-by-south,
  Floating so buoyant with milk-white foam on the waters.	  Floating so buoyant with milk-white foam on the waters.	  Floating so buoyant with milk-white foam on the waters.	  Floating so buoyant with milk-white foam on the waters.
			
  But I am not the sea nor the red sun,	  But I am not the sea nor the red sun,	  But I am not the sea nor the red sun,	  But I am not the sea nor the red sun,
  I am not the wind with girlish laughter,	  I am not the wind with girlish laughter,	  I am not the wind with girlish laughter,	  I am not the wind with girlish laughter,
  Not the immense wind which strengthens, not the wind which lashes,	  Not the immense wind which strengthens, not the wind which lashes,	  Not the immense wind which strengthens, not the wind which lashes,	  Not the immense wind which strengthens, not the wind which lashes,
  Not the spirit that ever lashes its own body to terror and death,	  Not the spirit that ever lashes its own body to terror and death,	  Not the spirit that ever lashes its own body to terror and death,	  Not the spirit that ever lashes its own body to terror and death,
  But I am that which unseen comes and sings, sings, sings,	  But I am that which unseen comes and sings, sings, sings,	  But I am that which unseen comes and sings, sings, sings,	  But I am that which unseen comes and sings, sings, sings,
  Which babbles in brooks and scoots in showers on the land,	  Which babbles in brooks and scoots in showers on the land,	  Which babbles in brooks and scoots in showers on the land,	  Which babbles in brooks and scoots in showers on the land,
  Which the birds know in the woods mornings and evenings,	  Which the birds know in the woods mornings and evenings,	  Which the birds know in the woods mornings and evenings,	  Which the birds know in the woods mornings and evenings,
  And the shore-sands know and the hissing wave, and that banner and pennant,	  And the shore-sands know and the hissing wave, and that banner and pennant,	  And the shore-sands know and the hissing wave, and that banner and pennant,	  And the shore-sands know and the hissing wave, and that banner and pennant,
  Aloft there flapping and flapping.	  Aloft there flapping and flapping.	  Aloft there flapping and flapping.	  Aloft there flapping and flapping.
			
       Child:	       Child:	       Child:	       Child:
  O father it is alive--it is full of people--it has children,	  O father it is alive--it is full of people--it has children,	  O father it is alive--it is full of people--it has children,	  O father it is alive--it is full of people--it has children,
  O now it seems to me it is talking to its children,	  O now it seems to me it is talking to its children,	  O now it seems to me it is talking to its children,	  O now it seems to me it is talking to its children,
  I hear it--it talks to me--O it is wonderful!	  I hear it--it talks to me--O it is wonderful!	  I hear it--it talks to me--O it is wonderful!	  I hear it--it talks to me--O it is wonderful!
  O it stretches--it spreads and runs so fast--O my father,	  O it stretches--it spreads and runs so fast--O my father,	  O it stretches--it spreads and runs so fast--O my father,	  O it stretches--it spreads and runs so fast--O my father,
  It is so broad it covers the whole sky.	  It is so broad it covers the whole sky.	  It is so broad it covers the whole sky.	  It is so broad it covers the whole sky.
			
       Father:	       Father:	       Father:	       Father:
  Cease, cease, my foolish babe,	  Cease, cease, my foolish babe,	  Cease, cease, my foolish babe,	  Cease, cease, my foolish babe,
  What you are saying is sorrowful to me, much 't displeases me;	  What you are saying is sorrowful to me, much 't displeases me;	  What you are saying is sorrowful to me, much 't displeases me;	  What you are saying is sorrowful to me, much 't displeases me;
  Behold with the rest again I say, behold not banners and pennants aloft,	  Behold with the rest again I say, behold not banners and pennants aloft,	  Behold with the rest again I say, behold not banners and pennants aloft,	  Behold with the rest again I say, behold not banners and pennants aloft,
  But the well-prepared pavements behold, and mark the solid-wall'd houses.	  But the well-prepared pavements behold, and mark the solid-wall'd houses.	  But the well-prepared pavements behold, and mark the solid-wall'd houses.	  But the well-prepared pavements behold, and mark the solid-wall'd houses.
			
       Banner and Pennant:	       Banner and Pennant:	       Banner and Pennant:	       Banner and Pennant:
  Speak to the child O bard out of Manhattan,	  Speak to the child O bard out of Manhattan,	  Speak to the child O bard out of Manhattan,	  Speak to the child O bard out of Manhattan,
  To our children all, or north or south of Manhattan,	  To our children all, or north or south of Manhattan,	  To our children all, or north or south of Manhattan,	  To our children all, or north or south of Manhattan,
  Point this day, leaving all the rest, to us over all--and yet we know	  Point this day, leaving all the rest, to us over all--and yet we know	  Point this day, leaving all the rest, to us over all--and yet we know	  Point this day, leaving all the rest, to us over all--and yet we know
      not why,	      not why,	      not why,	      not why,
  For what are we, mere strips of cloth profiting nothing,	  For what are we, mere strips of cloth profiting nothing,	  For what are we, mere strips of cloth profiting nothing,	  For what are we, mere strips of cloth profiting nothing,
  Only flapping in the wind?	  Only flapping in the wind?	  Only flapping in the wind?	  Only flapping in the wind?
			
			
      Poet:	      Poet:	      Poet:	      Poet:
  I hear and see not strips of cloth alone,	  I hear and see not strips of cloth alone,	  I hear and see not strips of cloth alone,	  I hear and see not strips of cloth alone,
  I hear the tramp of armies, I hear the challenging sentry,	  I hear the tramp of armies, I hear the challenging sentry,	  I hear the tramp of armies, I hear the challenging sentry,	  I hear the tramp of armies, I hear the challenging sentry,
  I hear the jubilant shouts of millions of men, I hear Liberty!	  I hear the jubilant shouts of millions of men, I hear Liberty!	  I hear the jubilant shouts of millions of men, I hear Liberty!	  I hear the jubilant shouts of millions of men, I hear Liberty!
  I hear the drums beat and the trumpets blowing,	  I hear the drums beat and the trumpets blowing,	  I hear the drums beat and the trumpets blowing,	  I hear the drums beat and the trumpets blowing,
  I myself move abroad swift-rising flying then,	  I myself move abroad swift-rising flying then,	  I myself move abroad swift-rising flying then,	  I myself move abroad swift-rising flying then,
  I use the wings of the land-bird and use the wings of the sea-bird,	  I use the wings of the land-bird and use the wings of the sea-bird,	  I use the wings of the land-bird and use the wings of the sea-bird,	  I use the wings of the land-bird and use the wings of the sea-bird,
      and look down as from a height,	      and look down as from a height,	      and look down as from a height,	      and look down as from a height,
  I do not deny the precious results of peace, I see populous cities	  I do not deny the precious results of peace, I see populous cities	  I do not deny the precious results of peace, I see populous cities	  I do not deny the precious results of peace, I see populous cities
      with wealth incalculable,	      with wealth incalculable,	      with wealth incalculable,	      with wealth incalculable,
  I see numberless farms, I see the farmers working in their fields or barns,	  I see numberless farms, I see the farmers working in their fields or barns,	  I see numberless farms, I see the farmers working in their fields or barns,	  I see numberless farms, I see the farmers working in their fields or barns,
  I see mechanics working, I see buildings everywhere founded, going	  I see mechanics working, I see buildings everywhere founded, going	  I see mechanics working, I see buildings everywhere founded, going	  I see mechanics working, I see buildings everywhere founded, going
      up, or finish'd,	      up, or finish'd,	      up, or finish'd,	      up, or finish'd,
  I see trains of cars swiftly speeding along railroad tracks drawn by	  I see trains of cars swiftly speeding along railroad tracks drawn by	  I see trains of cars swiftly speeding along railroad tracks drawn by	  I see trains of cars swiftly speeding along railroad tracks drawn by
      the locomotives,	      the locomotives,	      the locomotives,	      the locomotives,
  I see the stores, depots, of Boston, Baltimore, Charleston, New Orleans,	  I see the stores, depots, of Boston, Baltimore, Charleston, New Orleans,	  I see the stores, depots, of Boston, Baltimore, Charleston, New Orleans,	  I see the stores, depots, of Boston, Baltimore, Charleston, New Orleans,
  I see far in the West the immense area of grain, I dwell awhile hovering,	  I see far in the West the immense area of grain, I dwell awhile hovering,	  I see far in the West the immense area of grain, I dwell awhile hovering,	  I see far in the West the immense area of grain, I dwell awhile hovering,
  I pass to the lumber forests of the North, and again to the Southern	  I pass to the lumber forests of the North, and again to the Southern	  I pass to the lumber forests of the North, and again to the Southern	  I pass to the lumber forests of the North, and again to the Southern
      plantation, and again to California;	      plantation, and again to California;	      plantation, and again to California;	      plantation, and again to California;
  Sweeping the whole I see the countless profit, the busy gatherings,	  Sweeping the whole I see the countless profit, the busy gatherings,	  Sweeping the whole I see the countless profit, the busy gatherings,	  Sweeping the whole I see the countless profit, the busy gatherings,
      earn'd wages,	      earn'd wages,	      earn'd wages,	      earn'd wages,
  See the Identity formed out of thirty-eight spacious and haughty	  See the Identity formed out of thirty-eight spacious and haughty	  See the Identity formed out of thirty-eight spacious and haughty	  See the Identity formed out of thirty-eight spacious and haughty
      States, (and many more to come,)	      States, (and many more to come,)	      States, (and many more to come,)	      States, (and many more to come,)
  See forts on the shores of harbors, see ships sailing in and out;	  See forts on the shores of harbors, see ships sailing in and out;	  See forts on the shores of harbors, see ships sailing in and out;	  See forts on the shores of harbors, see ships sailing in and out;
  Then over all, (aye! aye!) my little and lengthen'd pennant shaped	  Then over all, (aye! aye!) my little and lengthen'd pennant shaped	  Then over all, (aye! aye!) my little and lengthen'd pennant shaped	  Then over all, (aye! aye!) my little and lengthen'd pennant shaped
      like a sword,	      like a sword,	      like a sword,	      like a sword,
  Runs swiftly up indicating war and defiance--and now the halyards	  Runs swiftly up indicating war and defiance--and now the halyards	  Runs swiftly up indicating war and defiance--and now the halyards	  Runs swiftly up indicating war and defiance--and now the halyards
      have rais'd it,	      have rais'd it,	      have rais'd it,	      have rais'd it,
  Side of my banner broad and blue, side of my starry banner,	  Side of my banner broad and blue, side of my starry banner,	  Side of my banner broad and blue, side of my starry banner,	  Side of my banner broad and blue, side of my starry banner,
  Discarding peace over all the sea and land.	  Discarding peace over all the sea and land.	  Discarding peace over all the sea and land.	  Discarding peace over all the sea and land.
			
       Banner and Pennant:	       Banner and Pennant:	       Banner and Pennant:	       Banner and Pennant:
  Yet louder, higher, stronger, bard! yet farther, wider cleave!	  Yet louder, higher, stronger, bard! yet farther, wider cleave!	  Yet louder, higher, stronger, bard! yet farther, wider cleave!	  Yet louder, higher, stronger, bard! yet farther, wider cleave!
  No longer let our children deem us riches and peace alone,	  No longer let our children deem us riches and peace alone,	  No longer let our children deem us riches and peace alone,	  No longer let our children deem us riches and peace alone,
  We may be terror and carnage, and are so now,	  We may be terror and carnage, and are so now,	  We may be terror and carnage, and are so now,	  We may be terror and carnage, and are so now,
  Not now are we any one of these spacious and haughty States, (nor	  Not now are we any one of these spacious and haughty States, (nor	  Not now are we any one of these spacious and haughty States, (nor	  Not now are we any one of these spacious and haughty States, (nor
      any five, nor ten,)	      any five, nor ten,)	      any five, nor ten,)	      any five, nor ten,)
  Nor market nor depot we, nor money-bank in the city,	  Nor market nor depot we, nor money-bank in the city,	  Nor market nor depot we, nor money-bank in the city,	  Nor market nor depot we, nor money-bank in the city,
  But these and all, and the brown and spreading land, and the mines	  But these and all, and the brown and spreading land, and the mines	  But these and all, and the brown and spreading land, and the mines	  But these and all, and the brown and spreading land, and the mines
      below, are ours,	      below, are ours,	      below, are ours,	      below, are ours,
  And the shores of the sea are ours, and the rivers great and small,	  And the shores of the sea are ours, and the rivers great and small,	  And the shores of the sea are ours, and the rivers great and small,	  And the shores of the sea are ours, and the rivers great and small,
  And the fields they moisten, and the crops and the fruits are ours,	  And the fields they moisten, and the crops and the fruits are ours,	  And the fields they moisten, and the crops and the fruits are ours,	  And the fields they moisten, and the crops and the fruits are ours,
  Bays and channels and ships sailing in and out are ours--while we over all,	  Bays and channels and ships sailing in and out are ours--while we over all,	  Bays and channels and ships sailing in and out are ours--while we over all,	  Bays and channels and ships sailing in and out are ours--while we over all,
  Over the area spread below, the three or four millions of square	  Over the area spread below, the three or four millions of square	  Over the area spread below, the three or four millions of square	  Over the area spread below, the three or four millions of square
      miles, the capitals,	      miles, the capitals,	      miles, the capitals,	      miles, the capitals,
  The forty millions of people,--O bard! in life and death supreme,	  The forty millions of people,--O bard! in life and death supreme,	  The forty millions of people,--O bard! in life and death supreme,	  The forty millions of people,--O bard! in life and death supreme,
  We, even we, henceforth flaunt out masterful, high up above,	  We, even we, henceforth flaunt out masterful, high up above,	  We, even we, henceforth flaunt out masterful, high up above,	  We, even we, henceforth flaunt out masterful, high up above,
  Not for the present alone, for a thousand years chanting through you,	  Not for the present alone, for a thousand years chanting through you,	  Not for the present alone, for a thousand years chanting through you,	  Not for the present alone, for a thousand years chanting through you,
  This song to the soul of one poor little child.	  This song to the soul of one poor little child.	  This song to the soul of one poor little child.	  This song to the soul of one poor little child.
			
       Child:	       Child:	       Child:	       Child:
  O my father I like not the houses,	  O my father I like not the houses,	  O my father I like not the houses,	  O my father I like not the houses,
  They will never to me be any thing, nor do I like money,	  They will never to me be any thing, nor do I like money,	  They will never to me be any thing, nor do I like money,	  They will never to me be any thing, nor do I like money,
  But to mount up there I would like, O father dear, that banner I like,	  But to mount up there I would like, O father dear, that banner I like,	  But to mount up there I would like, O father dear, that banner I like,	  But to mount up there I would like, O father dear, that banner I like,
  That pennant I would be and must be.	  That pennant I would be and must be.	  That pennant I would be and must be.	  That pennant I would be and must be.
			
       Father:	       Father:	       Father:	       Father:
  Child of mine you fill me with anguish,	  Child of mine you fill me with anguish,	  Child of mine you fill me with anguish,	  Child of mine you fill me with anguish,
  To be that pennant would be too fearful,	  To be that pennant would be too fearful,	  To be that pennant would be too fearful,	  To be that pennant would be too fearful,
  Little you know what it is this day, and after this day, forever,	  Little you know what it is this day, and after this day, forever,	  Little you know what it is this day, and after this day, forever,	  Little you know what it is this day, and after this day, forever,
  It is to gain nothing, but risk and defy every thing,	  It is to gain nothing, but risk and defy every thing,	  It is to gain nothing, but risk and defy every thing,	  It is to gain nothing, but risk and defy every thing,
  Forward to stand in front of wars--and O, such wars!--what have you	  Forward to stand in front of wars--and O, such wars!--what have you	  Forward to stand in front of wars--and O, such wars!--what have you	  Forward to stand in front of wars--and O, such wars!--what have you
      to do with them?	      to do with them?	      to do with them?	      to do with them?
  With passions of demons, slaughter, premature death?	  With passions of demons, slaughter, premature death?	  With passions of demons, slaughter, premature death?	  With passions of demons, slaughter, premature death?
			
       Banner:	       Banner:	       Banner:	       Banner:
  Demons and death then I sing,	  Demons and death then I sing,	  Demons and death then I sing,	  Demons and death then I sing,
  Put in all, aye all will I, sword-shaped pennant for war,	  Put in all, aye all will I, sword-shaped pennant for war,	  Put in all, aye all will I, sword-shaped pennant for war,	  Put in all, aye all will I, sword-shaped pennant for war,
  And a pleasure new and ecstatic, and the prattled yearning of children,	  And a pleasure new and ecstatic, and the prattled yearning of children,	  And a pleasure new and ecstatic, and the prattled yearning of children,	  And a pleasure new and ecstatic, and the prattled yearning of children,
  Blent with the sounds of the peaceful land and the liquid wash of the sea,	  Blent with the sounds of the peaceful land and the liquid wash of the sea,	  Blent with the sounds of the peaceful land and the liquid wash of the sea,	  Blent with the sounds of the peaceful land and the liquid wash of the sea,
  And the black ships fighting on the sea envelop'd in smoke,	  And the black ships fighting on the sea envelop'd in smoke,	  And the black ships fighting on the sea envelop'd in smoke,	  And the black ships fighting on the sea envelop'd in smoke,
  And the icy cool of the far, far north, with rustling cedars and pines,	  And the icy cool of the far, far north, with rustling cedars and pines,	  And the icy cool of the far, far north, with rustling cedars and pines,	  And the icy cool of the far, far north, with rustling cedars and pines,
  And the whirr of drums and the sound of soldiers marching, and the	  And the whirr of drums and the sound of soldiers marching, and the	  And the whirr of drums and the sound of soldiers marching, and the	  And the whirr of drums and the sound of soldiers marching, and the
      hot sun shining south,	      hot sun shining south,	      hot sun shining south,	      hot sun shining south,
  And the beach-waves combing over the beach on my Eastern shore,	  And the beach-waves combing over the beach on my Eastern shore,	  And the beach-waves combing over the beach on my Eastern shore,	  And the beach-waves combing over the beach on my Eastern shore,
      and my Western shore the same,	      and my Western shore the same,	      and my Western shore the same,	      and my Western shore the same,
  And all between those shores, and my ever running Mississippi with	  And all between those shores, and my ever running Mississippi with	  And all between those shores, and my ever running Mississippi with	  And all between those shores, and my ever running Mississippi with
      bends and chutes,	      bends and chutes,	      bends and chutes,	      bends and chutes,
  And my Illinois fields, and my Kansas fields, and my fields of Missouri,	  And my Illinois fields, and my Kansas fields, and my fields of Missouri,	  And my Illinois fields, and my Kansas fields, and my fields of Missouri,	  And my Illinois fields, and my Kansas fields, and my fields of Missouri,
  The Continent, devoting the whole identity without reserving an atom,	  The Continent, devoting the whole identity without reserving an atom,	  The Continent, devoting the whole identity without reserving an atom,	  The Continent, devoting the whole identity without reserving an atom,
  Pour in! whelm that which asks, which sings, with all and the yield of all,	  Pour in! whelm that which asks, which sings, with all and the yield of all,	  Pour in! whelm that which asks, which sings, with all and the yield of all,	  Pour in! whelm that which asks, which sings, with all and the yield of all,
  Fusing and holding, claiming, devouring the whole,	  Fusing and holding, claiming, devouring the whole,	  Fusing and holding, claiming, devouring the whole,	  Fusing and holding, claiming, devouring the whole,
  No more with tender lip, nor musical labial sound,	  No more with tender lip, nor musical labial sound,	  No more with tender lip, nor musical labial sound,	  No more with tender lip, nor musical labial sound,
  But out of the night emerging for good, our voice persuasive no more,	  But out of the night emerging for good, our voice persuasive no more,	  But out of the night emerging for good, our voice persuasive no more,	  But out of the night emerging for good, our voice persuasive no more,
  Croaking like crows here in the wind.	  Croaking like crows here in the wind.	  Croaking like crows here in the wind.	  Croaking like crows here in the wind.
			
       Poet:	       Poet:	       Poet:	       Poet:
  My limbs, my veins dilate, my theme is clear at last,	  My limbs, my veins dilate, my theme is clear at last,	  My limbs, my veins dilate, my theme is clear at last,	  My limbs, my veins dilate, my theme is clear at last,
  Banner so broad advancing out of the night, I sing you haughty and resolute,	  Banner so broad advancing out of the night, I sing you haughty and resolute,	  Banner so broad advancing out of the night, I sing you haughty and resolute,	  Banner so broad advancing out of the night, I sing you haughty and resolute,
  I burst through where I waited long, too long, deafen'd and blinded,	  I burst through where I waited long, too long, deafen'd and blinded,	  I burst through where I waited long, too long, deafen'd and blinded,	  I burst through where I waited long, too long, deafen'd and blinded,
  My hearing and tongue are come to me, (a little child taught me,)	  My hearing and tongue are come to me, (a little child taught me,)	  My hearing and tongue are come to me, (a little child taught me,)	  My hearing and tongue are come to me, (a little child taught me,)
  I hear from above O pennant of war your ironical call and demand,	  I hear from above O pennant of war your ironical call and demand,	  I hear from above O pennant of war your ironical call and demand,	  I hear from above O pennant of war your ironical call and demand,
  Insensate! insensate! (yet I at any rate chant you,) O banner!	  Insensate! insensate! (yet I at any rate chant you,) O banner!	  Insensate! insensate! (yet I at any rate chant you,) O banner!	  Insensate! insensate! (yet I at any rate chant you,) O banner!
  Not houses of peace indeed are you, nor any nor all their	  Not houses of peace indeed are you, nor any nor all their	  Not houses of peace indeed are you, nor any nor all their	  Not houses of peace indeed are you, nor any nor all their
      prosperity, (if need be, you shall again have every one of those	      prosperity, (if need be, you shall again have every one of those	      prosperity, (if need be, you shall again have every one of those	      prosperity, (if need be, you shall again have every one of those
      houses to destroy them,	      houses to destroy them,	      houses to destroy them,	      houses to destroy them,
  You thought not to destroy those valuable houses, standing fast,	  You thought not to destroy those valuable houses, standing fast,	  You thought not to destroy those valuable houses, standing fast,	  You thought not to destroy those valuable houses, standing fast,
      full of comfort, built with money,	      full of comfort, built with money,	      full of comfort, built with money,	      full of comfort, built with money,
  May they stand fast, then? not an hour except you above them and all	  May they stand fast, then? not an hour except you above them and all	  May they stand fast, then? not an hour except you above them and all	  May they stand fast, then? not an hour except you above them and all
      stand fast;)	      stand fast;)	      stand fast;)	      stand fast;)
  O banner, not money so precious are you, not farm produce you, nor	  O banner, not money so precious are you, not farm produce you, nor	  O banner, not money so precious are you, not farm produce you, nor	  O banner, not money so precious are you, not farm produce you, nor
      the material good nutriment,	      the material good nutriment,	      the material good nutriment,	      the material good nutriment,
  Nor excellent stores, nor landed on wharves from the ships,	  Nor excellent stores, nor landed on wharves from the ships,	  Nor excellent stores, nor landed on wharves from the ships,	  Nor excellent stores, nor landed on wharves from the ships,
  Not the superb ships with sail-power or steam-power, fetching and	  Not the superb ships with sail-power or steam-power, fetching and	  Not the superb ships with sail-power or steam-power, fetching and	  Not the superb ships with sail-power or steam-power, fetching and
      carrying cargoes,	      carrying cargoes,	      carrying cargoes,	      carrying cargoes,
  Nor machinery, vehicles, trade, nor revenues--but you as henceforth	  Nor machinery, vehicles, trade, nor revenues--but you as henceforth	  Nor machinery, vehicles, trade, nor revenues--but you as henceforth	  Nor machinery, vehicles, trade, nor revenues--but you as henceforth
      I see you,	      I see you,	      I see you,	      I see you,
  Running up out of the night, bringing your cluster of stars,	  Running up out of the night, bringing your cluster of stars,	  Running up out of the night, bringing your cluster of stars,	  Running up out of the night, bringing your cluster of stars,
      (ever-enlarging stars,)	      (ever-enlarging stars,)	      (ever-enlarging stars,)	      (ever-enlarging stars,)
  Divider of daybreak you, cutting the air, touch'd by the sun,	  Divider of daybreak you, cutting the air, touch'd by the sun,	  Divider of daybreak you, cutting the air, touch'd by the sun,	  Divider of daybreak you, cutting the air, touch'd by the sun,
      measuring the sky,	      measuring the sky,	      measuring the sky,	      measuring the sky,
  (Passionately seen and yearn'd for by one poor little child,	  (Passionately seen and yearn'd for by one poor little child,	  (Passionately seen and yearn'd for by one poor little child,	  (Passionately seen and yearn'd for by one poor little child,
  While others remain busy or smartly talking, forever teaching	  While others remain busy or smartly talking, forever teaching	  While others remain busy or smartly talking, forever teaching	  While others remain busy or smartly talking, forever teaching
      thrift, thrift;)	      thrift, thrift;)	      thrift, thrift;)	      thrift, thrift;)
  O you up there! O pennant! where you undulate like a snake hissing	  O you up there! O pennant! where you undulate like a snake hissing	  O you up there! O pennant! where you undulate like a snake hissing	  O you up there! O pennant! where you undulate like a snake hissing
      so curious,	      so curious,	      so curious,	      so curious,
  Out of reach, an idea only, yet furiously fought for, risking bloody	  Out of reach, an idea only, yet furiously fought for, risking bloody	  Out of reach, an idea only, yet furiously fought for, risking bloody	  Out of reach, an idea only, yet furiously fought for, risking bloody
      death, loved by me,	      death, loved by me,	      death, loved by me,	      death, loved by me,
  So loved--O you banner leading the day with stars brought from the night!	  So loved--O you banner leading the day with stars brought from the night!	  So loved--O you banner leading the day with stars brought from the night!	  So loved--O you banner leading the day with stars brought from the night!
  Valueless, object of eyes, over all and demanding all--(absolute	  Valueless, object of eyes, over all and demanding all--(absolute	  Valueless, object of eyes, over all and demanding all--(absolute	  Valueless, object of eyes, over all and demanding all--(absolute
      owner of all)--O banner and pennant!	      owner of all)--O banner and pennant!	      owner of all)--O banner and pennant!	      owner of all)--O banner and pennant!
  I too leave the rest--great as it is, it is nothing--houses, machines	  I too leave the rest--great as it is, it is nothing--houses, machines	  I too leave the rest--great as it is, it is nothing--houses, machines	  I too leave the rest--great as it is, it is nothing--houses, machines
      are nothing--I see them not,	      are nothing--I see them not,	      are nothing--I see them not,	      are nothing--I see them not,
  I see but you, O warlike pennant! O banner so broad, with stripes,	  I see but you, O warlike pennant! O banner so broad, with stripes,	  I see but you, O warlike pennant! O banner so broad, with stripes,	  I see but you, O warlike pennant! O banner so broad, with stripes,
      sing you only,	      sing you only,	      sing you only,	      sing you only,
  Flapping up there in the wind.	  Flapping up there in the wind.	  Flapping up there in the wind.	  Flapping up there in the wind.
			
			
			
			
Rise O Days from Your Fathomless Deeps	Rise O Days from Your Fathomless Deeps	Rise O Days from Your Fathomless Deeps	Rise O Days from Your Fathomless Deeps
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Rise O days from your fathomless deeps, till you loftier, fiercer sweep,	  Rise O days from your fathomless deeps, till you loftier, fiercer sweep,	  Rise O days from your fathomless deeps, till you loftier, fiercer sweep,	  Rise O days from your fathomless deeps, till you loftier, fiercer sweep,
  Long for my soul hungering gymnastic I devour'd what the earth gave me,	  Long for my soul hungering gymnastic I devour'd what the earth gave me,	  Long for my soul hungering gymnastic I devour'd what the earth gave me,	  Long for my soul hungering gymnastic I devour'd what the earth gave me,
  Long I roam'd amid the woods of the north, long I watch'd Niagara pouring,	  Long I roam'd amid the woods of the north, long I watch'd Niagara pouring,	  Long I roam'd amid the woods of the north, long I watch'd Niagara pouring,	  Long I roam'd amid the woods of the north, long I watch'd Niagara pouring,
  I travel'd the prairies over and slept on their breast, I cross'd	  I travel'd the prairies over and slept on their breast, I cross'd	  I travel'd the prairies over and slept on their breast, I cross'd	  I travel'd the prairies over and slept on their breast, I cross'd
      the Nevadas, I cross'd the plateaus,	      the Nevadas, I cross'd the plateaus,	      the Nevadas, I cross'd the plateaus,	      the Nevadas, I cross'd the plateaus,
  I ascended the towering rocks along the Pacific, I sail'd out to sea,	  I ascended the towering rocks along the Pacific, I sail'd out to sea,	  I ascended the towering rocks along the Pacific, I sail'd out to sea,	  I ascended the towering rocks along the Pacific, I sail'd out to sea,
  I sail'd through the storm, I was refresh'd by the storm,	  I sail'd through the storm, I was refresh'd by the storm,	  I sail'd through the storm, I was refresh'd by the storm,	  I sail'd through the storm, I was refresh'd by the storm,
  I watch'd with joy the threatening maws of the waves,	  I watch'd with joy the threatening maws of the waves,	  I watch'd with joy the threatening maws of the waves,	  I watch'd with joy the threatening maws of the waves,
			
  I mark'd the white combs where they career'd so high, curling over,	  I mark'd the white combs where they career'd so high, curling over,	  I mark'd the white combs where they career'd so high, curling over,	  I mark'd the white combs where they career'd so high, curling over,
  I heard the wind piping, I saw the black clouds,	  I heard the wind piping, I saw the black clouds,	  I heard the wind piping, I saw the black clouds,	  I heard the wind piping, I saw the black clouds,
  Saw from below what arose and mounted, (O superb! O wild as my	  Saw from below what arose and mounted, (O superb! O wild as my	  Saw from below what arose and mounted, (O superb! O wild as my	  Saw from below what arose and mounted, (O superb! O wild as my
      heart, and powerful!)	      heart, and powerful!)	      heart, and powerful!)	      heart, and powerful!)
  Heard the continuous thunder as it bellow'd after the lightning,	  Heard the continuous thunder as it bellow'd after the lightning,	  Heard the continuous thunder as it bellow'd after the lightning,	  Heard the continuous thunder as it bellow'd after the lightning,
  Noted the slender and jagged threads of lightning as sudden and	  Noted the slender and jagged threads of lightning as sudden and	  Noted the slender and jagged threads of lightning as sudden and	  Noted the slender and jagged threads of lightning as sudden and
      fast amid the din they chased each other across the sky;	      fast amid the din they chased each other across the sky;	      fast amid the din they chased each other across the sky;	      fast amid the din they chased each other across the sky;
  These, and such as these, I, elate, saw--saw with wonder, yet pensive	  These, and such as these, I, elate, saw--saw with wonder, yet pensive	  These, and such as these, I, elate, saw--saw with wonder, yet pensive	  These, and such as these, I, elate, saw--saw with wonder, yet pensive
      and masterful,	      and masterful,	      and masterful,	      and masterful,
  All the menacing might of the globe uprisen around me,	  All the menacing might of the globe uprisen around me,	  All the menacing might of the globe uprisen around me,	  All the menacing might of the globe uprisen around me,
  Yet there with my soul I fed, I fed content, supercilious.	  Yet there with my soul I fed, I fed content, supercilious.	  Yet there with my soul I fed, I fed content, supercilious.	  Yet there with my soul I fed, I fed content, supercilious.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  'Twas well, O soul--'twas a good preparation you gave me,	  'Twas well, O soul--'twas a good preparation you gave me,	  'Twas well, O soul--'twas a good preparation you gave me,	  'Twas well, O soul--'twas a good preparation you gave me,
  Now we advance our latent and ampler hunger to fill,	  Now we advance our latent and ampler hunger to fill,	  Now we advance our latent and ampler hunger to fill,	  Now we advance our latent and ampler hunger to fill,
  Now we go forth to receive what the earth and the sea never gave us,	  Now we go forth to receive what the earth and the sea never gave us,	  Now we go forth to receive what the earth and the sea never gave us,	  Now we go forth to receive what the earth and the sea never gave us,
  Not through the mighty woods we go, but through the mightier cities,	  Not through the mighty woods we go, but through the mightier cities,	  Not through the mighty woods we go, but through the mightier cities,	  Not through the mighty woods we go, but through the mightier cities,
  Something for us is pouring now more than Niagara pouring,	  Something for us is pouring now more than Niagara pouring,	  Something for us is pouring now more than Niagara pouring,	  Something for us is pouring now more than Niagara pouring,
  Torrents of men, (sources and rills of the Northwest are you indeed	  Torrents of men, (sources and rills of the Northwest are you indeed	  Torrents of men, (sources and rills of the Northwest are you indeed	  Torrents of men, (sources and rills of the Northwest are you indeed
      inexhaustible?)	      inexhaustible?)	      inexhaustible?)	      inexhaustible?)
  What, to pavements and homesteads here, what were those storms of	  What, to pavements and homesteads here, what were those storms of	  What, to pavements and homesteads here, what were those storms of	  What, to pavements and homesteads here, what were those storms of
      the mountains and sea?	      the mountains and sea?	      the mountains and sea?	      the mountains and sea?
  What, to passions I witness around me to-day? was the sea risen?	  What, to passions I witness around me to-day? was the sea risen?	  What, to passions I witness around me to-day? was the sea risen?	  What, to passions I witness around me to-day? was the sea risen?
  Was the wind piping the pipe of death under the black clouds?	  Was the wind piping the pipe of death under the black clouds?	  Was the wind piping the pipe of death under the black clouds?	  Was the wind piping the pipe of death under the black clouds?
  Lo! from deeps more unfathomable, something more deadly and savage,	  Lo! from deeps more unfathomable, something more deadly and savage,	  Lo! from deeps more unfathomable, something more deadly and savage,	  Lo! from deeps more unfathomable, something more deadly and savage,
  Manhattan rising, advancing with menacing front--Cincinnati, Chicago,	  Manhattan rising, advancing with menacing front--Cincinnati, Chicago,	  Manhattan rising, advancing with menacing front--Cincinnati, Chicago,	  Manhattan rising, advancing with menacing front--Cincinnati, Chicago,
      unchain'd;	      unchain'd;	      unchain'd;	      unchain'd;
  What was that swell I saw on the ocean? behold what comes here,	  What was that swell I saw on the ocean? behold what comes here,	  What was that swell I saw on the ocean? behold what comes here,	  What was that swell I saw on the ocean? behold what comes here,
  How it climbs with daring feet and hands--how it dashes!	  How it climbs with daring feet and hands--how it dashes!	  How it climbs with daring feet and hands--how it dashes!	  How it climbs with daring feet and hands--how it dashes!
  How the true thunder bellows after the lightning--how bright the	  How the true thunder bellows after the lightning--how bright the	  How the true thunder bellows after the lightning--how bright the	  How the true thunder bellows after the lightning--how bright the
      flashes of lightning!	      flashes of lightning!	      flashes of lightning!	      flashes of lightning!
  How Democracy with desperate vengeful port strides on, shown	  How Democracy with desperate vengeful port strides on, shown	  How Democracy with desperate vengeful port strides on, shown	  How Democracy with desperate vengeful port strides on, shown
      through the dark by those flashes of lightning!	      through the dark by those flashes of lightning!	      through the dark by those flashes of lightning!	      through the dark by those flashes of lightning!
  (Yet a mournful wall and low sob I fancied I heard through the dark,	  (Yet a mournful wall and low sob I fancied I heard through the dark,	  (Yet a mournful wall and low sob I fancied I heard through the dark,	  (Yet a mournful wall and low sob I fancied I heard through the dark,
  In a lull of the deafening confusion.)	  In a lull of the deafening confusion.)	  In a lull of the deafening confusion.)	  In a lull of the deafening confusion.)
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Thunder on! stride on, Democracy! strike with vengeful stroke!	  Thunder on! stride on, Democracy! strike with vengeful stroke!	  Thunder on! stride on, Democracy! strike with vengeful stroke!	  Thunder on! stride on, Democracy! strike with vengeful stroke!
  And do you rise higher than ever yet O days, O cities!	  And do you rise higher than ever yet O days, O cities!	  And do you rise higher than ever yet O days, O cities!	  And do you rise higher than ever yet O days, O cities!
  Crash heavier, heavier yet O storms! you have done me good,	  Crash heavier, heavier yet O storms! you have done me good,	  Crash heavier, heavier yet O storms! you have done me good,	  Crash heavier, heavier yet O storms! you have done me good,
  My soul prepared in the mountains absorbs your immortal strong nutriment,	  My soul prepared in the mountains absorbs your immortal strong nutriment,	  My soul prepared in the mountains absorbs your immortal strong nutriment,	  My soul prepared in the mountains absorbs your immortal strong nutriment,
  Long had I walk'd my cities, my country roads through farms, only	  Long had I walk'd my cities, my country roads through farms, only	  Long had I walk'd my cities, my country roads through farms, only	  Long had I walk'd my cities, my country roads through farms, only
      half satisfied,	      half satisfied,	      half satisfied,	      half satisfied,
  One doubt nauseous undulating like a snake, crawl'd on the ground before me,	  One doubt nauseous undulating like a snake, crawl'd on the ground before me,	  One doubt nauseous undulating like a snake, crawl'd on the ground before me,	  One doubt nauseous undulating like a snake, crawl'd on the ground before me,
  Continually preceding my steps, turning upon me oft, ironically hissing low;	  Continually preceding my steps, turning upon me oft, ironically hissing low;	  Continually preceding my steps, turning upon me oft, ironically hissing low;	  Continually preceding my steps, turning upon me oft, ironically hissing low;
  The cities I loved so well I abandon'd and left, I sped to the	  The cities I loved so well I abandon'd and left, I sped to the	  The cities I loved so well I abandon'd and left, I sped to the	  The cities I loved so well I abandon'd and left, I sped to the
      certainties suitable to me,	      certainties suitable to me,	      certainties suitable to me,	      certainties suitable to me,
  Hungering, hungering, hungering, for primal energies and Nature's	  Hungering, hungering, hungering, for primal energies and Nature's	  Hungering, hungering, hungering, for primal energies and Nature's	  Hungering, hungering, hungering, for primal energies and Nature's
      dauntlessness,	      dauntlessness,	      dauntlessness,	      dauntlessness,
  I refresh'd myself with it only, I could relish it only,	  I refresh'd myself with it only, I could relish it only,	  I refresh'd myself with it only, I could relish it only,	  I refresh'd myself with it only, I could relish it only,
  I waited the bursting forth of the pent fire--on the water and air	  I waited the bursting forth of the pent fire--on the water and air	  I waited the bursting forth of the pent fire--on the water and air	  I waited the bursting forth of the pent fire--on the water and air
      waited long;	      waited long;	      waited long;	      waited long;
  But now I no longer wait, I am fully satisfied, I am glutted,	  But now I no longer wait, I am fully satisfied, I am glutted,	  But now I no longer wait, I am fully satisfied, I am glutted,	  But now I no longer wait, I am fully satisfied, I am glutted,
  I have witness'd the true lightning, I have witness'd my cities electric,	  I have witness'd the true lightning, I have witness'd my cities electric,	  I have witness'd the true lightning, I have witness'd my cities electric,	  I have witness'd the true lightning, I have witness'd my cities electric,
  I have lived to behold man burst forth and warlike America rise,	  I have lived to behold man burst forth and warlike America rise,	  I have lived to behold man burst forth and warlike America rise,	  I have lived to behold man burst forth and warlike America rise,
  Hence I will seek no more the food of the northern solitary wilds,	  Hence I will seek no more the food of the northern solitary wilds,	  Hence I will seek no more the food of the northern solitary wilds,	  Hence I will seek no more the food of the northern solitary wilds,
  No more the mountains roam or sail the stormy sea.	  No more the mountains roam or sail the stormy sea.	  No more the mountains roam or sail the stormy sea.	  No more the mountains roam or sail the stormy sea.
			
			
			
			
Virginia--The West	Virginia--The West	Virginia--The West	Virginia--The West
			
  The noble sire fallen on evil days,	  The noble sire fallen on evil days,	  The noble sire fallen on evil days,	  The noble sire fallen on evil days,
  I saw with hand uplifted, menacing, brandishing,	  I saw with hand uplifted, menacing, brandishing,	  I saw with hand uplifted, menacing, brandishing,	  I saw with hand uplifted, menacing, brandishing,
  (Memories of old in abeyance, love and faith in abeyance,)	  (Memories of old in abeyance, love and faith in abeyance,)	  (Memories of old in abeyance, love and faith in abeyance,)	  (Memories of old in abeyance, love and faith in abeyance,)
  The insane knife toward the Mother of All.	  The insane knife toward the Mother of All.	  The insane knife toward the Mother of All.	  The insane knife toward the Mother of All.
			
  The noble son on sinewy feet advancing,	  The noble son on sinewy feet advancing,	  The noble son on sinewy feet advancing,	  The noble son on sinewy feet advancing,
  I saw, out of the land of prairies, land of Ohio's waters and of Indiana,	  I saw, out of the land of prairies, land of Ohio's waters and of Indiana,	  I saw, out of the land of prairies, land of Ohio's waters and of Indiana,	  I saw, out of the land of prairies, land of Ohio's waters and of Indiana,
  To the rescue the stalwart giant hurry his plenteous offspring,	  To the rescue the stalwart giant hurry his plenteous offspring,	  To the rescue the stalwart giant hurry his plenteous offspring,	  To the rescue the stalwart giant hurry his plenteous offspring,
  Drest in blue, bearing their trusty rifles on their shoulders.	  Drest in blue, bearing their trusty rifles on their shoulders.	  Drest in blue, bearing their trusty rifles on their shoulders.	  Drest in blue, bearing their trusty rifles on their shoulders.
			
  Then the Mother of All with calm voice speaking,	  Then the Mother of All with calm voice speaking,	  Then the Mother of All with calm voice speaking,	  Then the Mother of All with calm voice speaking,
  As to you Rebellious, (I seemed to hear her say,) why strive against	  As to you Rebellious, (I seemed to hear her say,) why strive against	  As to you Rebellious, (I seemed to hear her say,) why strive against	  As to you Rebellious, (I seemed to hear her say,) why strive against
      me, and why seek my life?	      me, and why seek my life?	      me, and why seek my life?	      me, and why seek my life?
  When you yourself forever provide to defend me?	  When you yourself forever provide to defend me?	  When you yourself forever provide to defend me?	  When you yourself forever provide to defend me?
  For you provided me Washington--and now these also.	  For you provided me Washington--and now these also.	  For you provided me Washington--and now these also.	  For you provided me Washington--and now these also.
			
			
			
			
City of Ships	City of Ships	City of Ships	City of Ships
			
  City of ships!	  City of ships!	  City of ships!	  City of ships!
  (O the black ships! O the fierce ships!	  (O the black ships! O the fierce ships!	  (O the black ships! O the fierce ships!	  (O the black ships! O the fierce ships!
  O the beautiful sharp-bow'd steam-ships and sail-ships!)	  O the beautiful sharp-bow'd steam-ships and sail-ships!)	  O the beautiful sharp-bow'd steam-ships and sail-ships!)	  O the beautiful sharp-bow'd steam-ships and sail-ships!)
  City of the world! (for all races are here,	  City of the world! (for all races are here,	  City of the world! (for all races are here,	  City of the world! (for all races are here,
  All the lands of the earth make contributions here;)	  All the lands of the earth make contributions here;)	  All the lands of the earth make contributions here;)	  All the lands of the earth make contributions here;)
  City of the sea! city of hurried and glittering tides!	  City of the sea! city of hurried and glittering tides!	  City of the sea! city of hurried and glittering tides!	  City of the sea! city of hurried and glittering tides!
  City whose gleeful tides continually rush or recede, whirling in and	  City whose gleeful tides continually rush or recede, whirling in and	  City whose gleeful tides continually rush or recede, whirling in and	  City whose gleeful tides continually rush or recede, whirling in and
      out with eddies and foam!	      out with eddies and foam!	      out with eddies and foam!	      out with eddies and foam!
  City of wharves and stores--city of tall facades of marble and iron!	  City of wharves and stores--city of tall facades of marble and iron!	  City of wharves and stores--city of tall facades of marble and iron!	  City of wharves and stores--city of tall facades of marble and iron!
  Proud and passionate city--mettlesome, mad, extravagant city!	  Proud and passionate city--mettlesome, mad, extravagant city!	  Proud and passionate city--mettlesome, mad, extravagant city!	  Proud and passionate city--mettlesome, mad, extravagant city!
  Spring up O city--not for peace alone, but be indeed yourself, warlike!	  Spring up O city--not for peace alone, but be indeed yourself, warlike!	  Spring up O city--not for peace alone, but be indeed yourself, warlike!	  Spring up O city--not for peace alone, but be indeed yourself, warlike!
  Fear not--submit to no models but your own O city!	  Fear not--submit to no models but your own O city!	  Fear not--submit to no models but your own O city!	  Fear not--submit to no models but your own O city!
  Behold me--incarnate me as I have incarnated you!	  Behold me--incarnate me as I have incarnated you!	  Behold me--incarnate me as I have incarnated you!	  Behold me--incarnate me as I have incarnated you!
  I have rejected nothing you offer'd me--whom you adopted I have adopted,	  I have rejected nothing you offer'd me--whom you adopted I have adopted,	  I have rejected nothing you offer'd me--whom you adopted I have adopted,	  I have rejected nothing you offer'd me--whom you adopted I have adopted,
  Good or bad I never question you--I love all--I do not condemn any thing,	  Good or bad I never question you--I love all--I do not condemn any thing,	  Good or bad I never question you--I love all--I do not condemn any thing,	  Good or bad I never question you--I love all--I do not condemn any thing,
  I chant and celebrate all that is yours--yet peace no more,	  I chant and celebrate all that is yours--yet peace no more,	  I chant and celebrate all that is yours--yet peace no more,	  I chant and celebrate all that is yours--yet peace no more,
  In peace I chanted peace, but now the drum of war is mine,	  In peace I chanted peace, but now the drum of war is mine,	  In peace I chanted peace, but now the drum of war is mine,	  In peace I chanted peace, but now the drum of war is mine,
  War, red war is my song through your streets, O city!	  War, red war is my song through your streets, O city!	  War, red war is my song through your streets, O city!	  War, red war is my song through your streets, O city!
			
			
			
			
The Centenarian's Story	The Centenarian's Story	The Centenarian's Story	The Centenarian's Story
			
       [Volunteer of 1861-2, at Washington Park, Brooklyn, assisting	       [Volunteer of 1861-2, at Washington Park, Brooklyn, assisting	       [Volunteer of 1861-2, at Washington Park, Brooklyn, assisting	       [Volunteer of 1861-2, at Washington Park, Brooklyn, assisting
       the Centenarian.]	       the Centenarian.]	       the Centenarian.]	       the Centenarian.]
  Give me your hand old Revolutionary,	  Give me your hand old Revolutionary,	  Give me your hand old Revolutionary,	  Give me your hand old Revolutionary,
  The hill-top is nigh, but a few steps, (make room gentlemen,)	  The hill-top is nigh, but a few steps, (make room gentlemen,)	  The hill-top is nigh, but a few steps, (make room gentlemen,)	  The hill-top is nigh, but a few steps, (make room gentlemen,)
  Up the path you have follow'd me well, spite of your hundred and	  Up the path you have follow'd me well, spite of your hundred and	  Up the path you have follow'd me well, spite of your hundred and	  Up the path you have follow'd me well, spite of your hundred and
      extra years,	      extra years,	      extra years,	      extra years,
  You can walk old man, though your eyes are almost done,	  You can walk old man, though your eyes are almost done,	  You can walk old man, though your eyes are almost done,	  You can walk old man, though your eyes are almost done,
  Your faculties serve you, and presently I must have them serve me.	  Your faculties serve you, and presently I must have them serve me.	  Your faculties serve you, and presently I must have them serve me.	  Your faculties serve you, and presently I must have them serve me.
			
  Rest, while I tell what the crowd around us means,	  Rest, while I tell what the crowd around us means,	  Rest, while I tell what the crowd around us means,	  Rest, while I tell what the crowd around us means,
  On the plain below recruits are drilling and exercising,	  On the plain below recruits are drilling and exercising,	  On the plain below recruits are drilling and exercising,	  On the plain below recruits are drilling and exercising,
  There is the camp, one regiment departs to-morrow,	  There is the camp, one regiment departs to-morrow,	  There is the camp, one regiment departs to-morrow,	  There is the camp, one regiment departs to-morrow,
  Do you hear the officers giving their orders?	  Do you hear the officers giving their orders?	  Do you hear the officers giving their orders?	  Do you hear the officers giving their orders?
  Do you hear the clank of the muskets?	  Do you hear the clank of the muskets?	  Do you hear the clank of the muskets?	  Do you hear the clank of the muskets?
  Why what comes over you now old man?	  Why what comes over you now old man?	  Why what comes over you now old man?	  Why what comes over you now old man?
  Why do you tremble and clutch my hand so convulsively?	  Why do you tremble and clutch my hand so convulsively?	  Why do you tremble and clutch my hand so convulsively?	  Why do you tremble and clutch my hand so convulsively?
  The troops are but drilling, they are yet surrounded with smiles,	  The troops are but drilling, they are yet surrounded with smiles,	  The troops are but drilling, they are yet surrounded with smiles,	  The troops are but drilling, they are yet surrounded with smiles,
  Around them at hand the well-drest friends and the women,	  Around them at hand the well-drest friends and the women,	  Around them at hand the well-drest friends and the women,	  Around them at hand the well-drest friends and the women,
  While splendid and warm the afternoon sun shines down,	  While splendid and warm the afternoon sun shines down,	  While splendid and warm the afternoon sun shines down,	  While splendid and warm the afternoon sun shines down,
  Green the midsummer verdure and fresh blows the dallying breeze,	  Green the midsummer verdure and fresh blows the dallying breeze,	  Green the midsummer verdure and fresh blows the dallying breeze,	  Green the midsummer verdure and fresh blows the dallying breeze,
  O'er proud and peaceful cities and arm of the sea between.	  O'er proud and peaceful cities and arm of the sea between.	  O'er proud and peaceful cities and arm of the sea between.	  O'er proud and peaceful cities and arm of the sea between.
			
  But drill and parade are over, they march back to quarters,	  But drill and parade are over, they march back to quarters,	  But drill and parade are over, they march back to quarters,	  But drill and parade are over, they march back to quarters,
  Only hear that approval of hands! hear what a clapping!	  Only hear that approval of hands! hear what a clapping!	  Only hear that approval of hands! hear what a clapping!	  Only hear that approval of hands! hear what a clapping!
			
  As wending the crowds now part and disperse--but we old man,	  As wending the crowds now part and disperse--but we old man,	  As wending the crowds now part and disperse--but we old man,	  As wending the crowds now part and disperse--but we old man,
  Not for nothing have I brought you hither--we must remain,	  Not for nothing have I brought you hither--we must remain,	  Not for nothing have I brought you hither--we must remain,	  Not for nothing have I brought you hither--we must remain,
  You to speak in your turn, and I to listen and tell.	  You to speak in your turn, and I to listen and tell.	  You to speak in your turn, and I to listen and tell.	  You to speak in your turn, and I to listen and tell.
			
       [The Centenarian]	       [The Centenarian]	       [The Centenarian]	       [The Centenarian]
  When I clutch'd your hand it was not with terror,	  When I clutch'd your hand it was not with terror,	  When I clutch'd your hand it was not with terror,	  When I clutch'd your hand it was not with terror,
  But suddenly pouring about me here on every side,	  But suddenly pouring about me here on every side,	  But suddenly pouring about me here on every side,	  But suddenly pouring about me here on every side,
  And below there where the boys were drilling, and up the slopes they ran,	  And below there where the boys were drilling, and up the slopes they ran,	  And below there where the boys were drilling, and up the slopes they ran,	  And below there where the boys were drilling, and up the slopes they ran,
  And where tents are pitch'd, and wherever you see south and south-	  And where tents are pitch'd, and wherever you see south and south-	  And where tents are pitch'd, and wherever you see south and south-	  And where tents are pitch'd, and wherever you see south and south-
      east and south-west,	      east and south-west,	      east and south-west,	      east and south-west,
  Over hills, across lowlands, and in the skirts of woods,	  Over hills, across lowlands, and in the skirts of woods,	  Over hills, across lowlands, and in the skirts of woods,	  Over hills, across lowlands, and in the skirts of woods,
  And along the shores, in mire (now fill'd over) came again and	  And along the shores, in mire (now fill'd over) came again and	  And along the shores, in mire (now fill'd over) came again and	  And along the shores, in mire (now fill'd over) came again and
      suddenly raged,	      suddenly raged,	      suddenly raged,	      suddenly raged,
  As eighty-five years agone no mere parade receiv'd with applause of friends,	  As eighty-five years agone no mere parade receiv'd with applause of friends,	  As eighty-five years agone no mere parade receiv'd with applause of friends,	  As eighty-five years agone no mere parade receiv'd with applause of friends,
  But a battle which I took part in myself--aye, long ago as it is, I	  But a battle which I took part in myself--aye, long ago as it is, I	  But a battle which I took part in myself--aye, long ago as it is, I	  But a battle which I took part in myself--aye, long ago as it is, I
      took part in it,	      took part in it,	      took part in it,	      took part in it,
  Walking then this hilltop, this same ground.	  Walking then this hilltop, this same ground.	  Walking then this hilltop, this same ground.	  Walking then this hilltop, this same ground.
			
  Aye, this is the ground,	  Aye, this is the ground,	  Aye, this is the ground,	  Aye, this is the ground,
  My blind eyes even as I speak behold it re-peopled from graves,	  My blind eyes even as I speak behold it re-peopled from graves,	  My blind eyes even as I speak behold it re-peopled from graves,	  My blind eyes even as I speak behold it re-peopled from graves,
  The years recede, pavements and stately houses disappear,	  The years recede, pavements and stately houses disappear,	  The years recede, pavements and stately houses disappear,	  The years recede, pavements and stately houses disappear,
  Rude forts appear again, the old hoop'd guns are mounted,	  Rude forts appear again, the old hoop'd guns are mounted,	  Rude forts appear again, the old hoop'd guns are mounted,	  Rude forts appear again, the old hoop'd guns are mounted,
  I see the lines of rais'd earth stretching from river to bay,	  I see the lines of rais'd earth stretching from river to bay,	  I see the lines of rais'd earth stretching from river to bay,	  I see the lines of rais'd earth stretching from river to bay,
  I mark the vista of waters, I mark the uplands and slopes;	  I mark the vista of waters, I mark the uplands and slopes;	  I mark the vista of waters, I mark the uplands and slopes;	  I mark the vista of waters, I mark the uplands and slopes;
  Here we lay encamp'd, it was this time in summer also.	  Here we lay encamp'd, it was this time in summer also.	  Here we lay encamp'd, it was this time in summer also.	  Here we lay encamp'd, it was this time in summer also.
			
  As I talk I remember all, I remember the Declaration,	  As I talk I remember all, I remember the Declaration,	  As I talk I remember all, I remember the Declaration,	  As I talk I remember all, I remember the Declaration,
  It was read here, the whole army paraded, it was read to us here,	  It was read here, the whole army paraded, it was read to us here,	  It was read here, the whole army paraded, it was read to us here,	  It was read here, the whole army paraded, it was read to us here,
  By his staff surrounded the General stood in the middle, he held up	  By his staff surrounded the General stood in the middle, he held up	  By his staff surrounded the General stood in the middle, he held up	  By his staff surrounded the General stood in the middle, he held up
      his unsheath'd sword,	      his unsheath'd sword,	      his unsheath'd sword,	      his unsheath'd sword,
  It glitter'd in the sun in full sight of the army.	  It glitter'd in the sun in full sight of the army.	  It glitter'd in the sun in full sight of the army.	  It glitter'd in the sun in full sight of the army.
			
  Twas a bold act then--the English war-ships had just arrived,	  Twas a bold act then--the English war-ships had just arrived,	  Twas a bold act then--the English war-ships had just arrived,	  Twas a bold act then--the English war-ships had just arrived,
  We could watch down the lower bay where they lay at anchor,	  We could watch down the lower bay where they lay at anchor,	  We could watch down the lower bay where they lay at anchor,	  We could watch down the lower bay where they lay at anchor,
  And the transports swarming with soldiers.	  And the transports swarming with soldiers.	  And the transports swarming with soldiers.	  And the transports swarming with soldiers.
			
  A few days more and they landed, and then the battle.	  A few days more and they landed, and then the battle.	  A few days more and they landed, and then the battle.	  A few days more and they landed, and then the battle.
			
  Twenty thousand were brought against us,	  Twenty thousand were brought against us,	  Twenty thousand were brought against us,	  Twenty thousand were brought against us,
  A veteran force furnish'd with good artillery.	  A veteran force furnish'd with good artillery.	  A veteran force furnish'd with good artillery.	  A veteran force furnish'd with good artillery.
			
  I tell not now the whole of the battle,	  I tell not now the whole of the battle,	  I tell not now the whole of the battle,	  I tell not now the whole of the battle,
  But one brigade early in the forenoon order'd forward to engage the	  But one brigade early in the forenoon order'd forward to engage the	  But one brigade early in the forenoon order'd forward to engage the	  But one brigade early in the forenoon order'd forward to engage the
      red-coats,	      red-coats,	      red-coats,	      red-coats,
  Of that brigade I tell, and how steadily it march'd,	  Of that brigade I tell, and how steadily it march'd,	  Of that brigade I tell, and how steadily it march'd,	  Of that brigade I tell, and how steadily it march'd,
  And how long and well it stood confronting death.	  And how long and well it stood confronting death.	  And how long and well it stood confronting death.	  And how long and well it stood confronting death.
			
  Who do you think that was marching steadily sternly confronting death?	  Who do you think that was marching steadily sternly confronting death?	  Who do you think that was marching steadily sternly confronting death?	  Who do you think that was marching steadily sternly confronting death?
  It was the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand strong,	  It was the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand strong,	  It was the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand strong,	  It was the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand strong,
  Rais'd in Virginia and Maryland, and most of them known personally	  Rais'd in Virginia and Maryland, and most of them known personally	  Rais'd in Virginia and Maryland, and most of them known personally	  Rais'd in Virginia and Maryland, and most of them known personally
      to the General.	      to the General.	      to the General.	      to the General.
			
  Jauntily forward they went with quick step toward Gowanus' waters,	  Jauntily forward they went with quick step toward Gowanus' waters,	  Jauntily forward they went with quick step toward Gowanus' waters,	  Jauntily forward they went with quick step toward Gowanus' waters,
  Till of a sudden unlook'd for by defiles through the woods, gain'd at night,	  Till of a sudden unlook'd for by defiles through the woods, gain'd at night,	  Till of a sudden unlook'd for by defiles through the woods, gain'd at night,	  Till of a sudden unlook'd for by defiles through the woods, gain'd at night,
  The British advancing, rounding in from the east, fiercely playing	  The British advancing, rounding in from the east, fiercely playing	  The British advancing, rounding in from the east, fiercely playing	  The British advancing, rounding in from the east, fiercely playing
      their guns,	      their guns,	      their guns,	      their guns,
  That brigade of the youngest was cut off and at the enemy's mercy.	  That brigade of the youngest was cut off and at the enemy's mercy.	  That brigade of the youngest was cut off and at the enemy's mercy.	  That brigade of the youngest was cut off and at the enemy's mercy.
			
  The General watch'd them from this hill,	  The General watch'd them from this hill,	  The General watch'd them from this hill,	  The General watch'd them from this hill,
  They made repeated desperate attempts to burst their environment,	  They made repeated desperate attempts to burst their environment,	  They made repeated desperate attempts to burst their environment,	  They made repeated desperate attempts to burst their environment,
  Then drew close together, very compact, their flag flying in the middle,	  Then drew close together, very compact, their flag flying in the middle,	  Then drew close together, very compact, their flag flying in the middle,	  Then drew close together, very compact, their flag flying in the middle,
  But O from the hills how the cannon were thinning and thinning them!	  But O from the hills how the cannon were thinning and thinning them!	  But O from the hills how the cannon were thinning and thinning them!	  But O from the hills how the cannon were thinning and thinning them!
			
  It sickens me yet, that slaughter!	  It sickens me yet, that slaughter!	  It sickens me yet, that slaughter!	  It sickens me yet, that slaughter!
  I saw the moisture gather in drops on the face of the General.	  I saw the moisture gather in drops on the face of the General.	  I saw the moisture gather in drops on the face of the General.	  I saw the moisture gather in drops on the face of the General.
  I saw how he wrung his hands in anguish.	  I saw how he wrung his hands in anguish.	  I saw how he wrung his hands in anguish.	  I saw how he wrung his hands in anguish.
			
  Meanwhile the British manoeuvr'd to draw us out for a pitch'd battle,	  Meanwhile the British manoeuvr'd to draw us out for a pitch'd battle,	  Meanwhile the British manoeuvr'd to draw us out for a pitch'd battle,	  Meanwhile the British manoeuvr'd to draw us out for a pitch'd battle,
  But we dared not trust the chances of a pitch'd battle.	  But we dared not trust the chances of a pitch'd battle.	  But we dared not trust the chances of a pitch'd battle.	  But we dared not trust the chances of a pitch'd battle.
			
  We fought the fight in detachments,	  We fought the fight in detachments,	  We fought the fight in detachments,	  We fought the fight in detachments,
  Sallying forth we fought at several points, but in each the luck was	  Sallying forth we fought at several points, but in each the luck was	  Sallying forth we fought at several points, but in each the luck was	  Sallying forth we fought at several points, but in each the luck was
      against us,	      against us,	      against us,	      against us,
  Our foe advancing, steadily getting the best of it, push'd us back	  Our foe advancing, steadily getting the best of it, push'd us back	  Our foe advancing, steadily getting the best of it, push'd us back	  Our foe advancing, steadily getting the best of it, push'd us back
      to the works on this hill,	      to the works on this hill,	      to the works on this hill,	      to the works on this hill,
  Till we turn'd menacing here, and then he left us.	  Till we turn'd menacing here, and then he left us.	  Till we turn'd menacing here, and then he left us.	  Till we turn'd menacing here, and then he left us.
			
  That was the going out of the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand	  That was the going out of the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand	  That was the going out of the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand	  That was the going out of the brigade of the youngest men, two thousand
      strong,	      strong,	      strong,	      strong,
  Few return'd, nearly all remain in Brooklyn.	  Few return'd, nearly all remain in Brooklyn.	  Few return'd, nearly all remain in Brooklyn.	  Few return'd, nearly all remain in Brooklyn.
			
  That and here my General's first battle,	  That and here my General's first battle,	  That and here my General's first battle,	  That and here my General's first battle,
  No women looking on nor sunshine to bask in, it did not conclude	  No women looking on nor sunshine to bask in, it did not conclude	  No women looking on nor sunshine to bask in, it did not conclude	  No women looking on nor sunshine to bask in, it did not conclude
      with applause,	      with applause,	      with applause,	      with applause,
  Nobody clapp'd hands here then.	  Nobody clapp'd hands here then.	  Nobody clapp'd hands here then.	  Nobody clapp'd hands here then.
			
  But in darkness in mist on the ground under a chill rain,	  But in darkness in mist on the ground under a chill rain,	  But in darkness in mist on the ground under a chill rain,	  But in darkness in mist on the ground under a chill rain,
  Wearied that night we lay foil'd and sullen,	  Wearied that night we lay foil'd and sullen,	  Wearied that night we lay foil'd and sullen,	  Wearied that night we lay foil'd and sullen,
  While scornfully laugh'd many an arrogant lord off against us encamp'd,	  While scornfully laugh'd many an arrogant lord off against us encamp'd,	  While scornfully laugh'd many an arrogant lord off against us encamp'd,	  While scornfully laugh'd many an arrogant lord off against us encamp'd,
  Quite within hearing, feasting, clinking wineglasses together over	  Quite within hearing, feasting, clinking wineglasses together over	  Quite within hearing, feasting, clinking wineglasses together over	  Quite within hearing, feasting, clinking wineglasses together over
      their victory.	      their victory.	      their victory.	      their victory.
			
  So dull and damp and another day,	  So dull and damp and another day,	  So dull and damp and another day,	  So dull and damp and another day,
  But the night of that, mist lifting, rain ceasing,	  But the night of that, mist lifting, rain ceasing,	  But the night of that, mist lifting, rain ceasing,	  But the night of that, mist lifting, rain ceasing,
  Silent as a ghost while they thought they were sure of him, my	  Silent as a ghost while they thought they were sure of him, my	  Silent as a ghost while they thought they were sure of him, my	  Silent as a ghost while they thought they were sure of him, my
      General retreated.	      General retreated.	      General retreated.	      General retreated.
			
  I saw him at the river-side,	  I saw him at the river-side,	  I saw him at the river-side,	  I saw him at the river-side,
  Down by the ferry lit by torches, hastening the embarcation;	  Down by the ferry lit by torches, hastening the embarcation;	  Down by the ferry lit by torches, hastening the embarcation;	  Down by the ferry lit by torches, hastening the embarcation;
  My General waited till the soldiers and wounded were all pass'd over,	  My General waited till the soldiers and wounded were all pass'd over,	  My General waited till the soldiers and wounded were all pass'd over,	  My General waited till the soldiers and wounded were all pass'd over,
  And then, (it was just ere sunrise,) these eyes rested on him for	  And then, (it was just ere sunrise,) these eyes rested on him for	  And then, (it was just ere sunrise,) these eyes rested on him for	  And then, (it was just ere sunrise,) these eyes rested on him for
      the last time.	      the last time.	      the last time.	      the last time.
			
  Every one else seem'd fill'd with gloom,	  Every one else seem'd fill'd with gloom,	  Every one else seem'd fill'd with gloom,	  Every one else seem'd fill'd with gloom,
  Many no doubt thought of capitulation.	  Many no doubt thought of capitulation.	  Many no doubt thought of capitulation.	  Many no doubt thought of capitulation.
			
  But when my General pass'd me,	  But when my General pass'd me,	  But when my General pass'd me,	  But when my General pass'd me,
  As he stood in his boat and look'd toward the coming sun,	  As he stood in his boat and look'd toward the coming sun,	  As he stood in his boat and look'd toward the coming sun,	  As he stood in his boat and look'd toward the coming sun,
  I saw something different from capitulation.	  I saw something different from capitulation.	  I saw something different from capitulation.	  I saw something different from capitulation.
			
       [Terminus]	       [Terminus]	       [Terminus]	       [Terminus]
  Enough, the Centenarian's story ends,	  Enough, the Centenarian's story ends,	  Enough, the Centenarian's story ends,	  Enough, the Centenarian's story ends,
  The two, the past and present, have interchanged,	  The two, the past and present, have interchanged,	  The two, the past and present, have interchanged,	  The two, the past and present, have interchanged,
  I myself as connecter, as chansonnier of a great future, am now speaking.	  I myself as connecter, as chansonnier of a great future, am now speaking.	  I myself as connecter, as chansonnier of a great future, am now speaking.	  I myself as connecter, as chansonnier of a great future, am now speaking.
			
  And is this the ground Washington trod?	  And is this the ground Washington trod?	  And is this the ground Washington trod?	  And is this the ground Washington trod?
  And these waters I listlessly daily cross, are these the waters he cross'd,	  And these waters I listlessly daily cross, are these the waters he cross'd,	  And these waters I listlessly daily cross, are these the waters he cross'd,	  And these waters I listlessly daily cross, are these the waters he cross'd,
  As resolute in defeat as other generals in their proudest triumphs?	  As resolute in defeat as other generals in their proudest triumphs?	  As resolute in defeat as other generals in their proudest triumphs?	  As resolute in defeat as other generals in their proudest triumphs?
			
  I must copy the story, and send it eastward and westward,	  I must copy the story, and send it eastward and westward,	  I must copy the story, and send it eastward and westward,	  I must copy the story, and send it eastward and westward,
  I must preserve that look as it beam'd on you rivers of Brooklyn.	  I must preserve that look as it beam'd on you rivers of Brooklyn.	  I must preserve that look as it beam'd on you rivers of Brooklyn.	  I must preserve that look as it beam'd on you rivers of Brooklyn.
			
  See--as the annual round returns the phantoms return,	  See--as the annual round returns the phantoms return,	  See--as the annual round returns the phantoms return,	  See--as the annual round returns the phantoms return,
  It is the 27th of August and the British have landed,	  It is the 27th of August and the British have landed,	  It is the 27th of August and the British have landed,	  It is the 27th of August and the British have landed,
  The battle begins and goes against us, behold through the smoke	  The battle begins and goes against us, behold through the smoke	  The battle begins and goes against us, behold through the smoke	  The battle begins and goes against us, behold through the smoke
      Washington's face,	      Washington's face,	      Washington's face,	      Washington's face,
  The brigade of Virginia and Maryland have march'd forth to intercept	  The brigade of Virginia and Maryland have march'd forth to intercept	  The brigade of Virginia and Maryland have march'd forth to intercept	  The brigade of Virginia and Maryland have march'd forth to intercept
      the enemy,	      the enemy,	      the enemy,	      the enemy,
  They are cut off, murderous artillery from the hills plays upon them,	  They are cut off, murderous artillery from the hills plays upon them,	  They are cut off, murderous artillery from the hills plays upon them,	  They are cut off, murderous artillery from the hills plays upon them,
  Rank after rank falls, while over them silently droops the flag,	  Rank after rank falls, while over them silently droops the flag,	  Rank after rank falls, while over them silently droops the flag,	  Rank after rank falls, while over them silently droops the flag,
  Baptized that day in many a young man's bloody wounds.	  Baptized that day in many a young man's bloody wounds.	  Baptized that day in many a young man's bloody wounds.	  Baptized that day in many a young man's bloody wounds.
  In death, defeat, and sisters', mothers' tears.	  In death, defeat, and sisters', mothers' tears.	  In death, defeat, and sisters', mothers' tears.	  In death, defeat, and sisters', mothers' tears.
			
  Ah, hills and slopes of Brooklyn! I perceive you are more valuable	  Ah, hills and slopes of Brooklyn! I perceive you are more valuable	  Ah, hills and slopes of Brooklyn! I perceive you are more valuable	  Ah, hills and slopes of Brooklyn! I perceive you are more valuable
      than your owners supposed;	      than your owners supposed;	      than your owners supposed;	      than your owners supposed;
  In the midst of you stands an encampment very old,	  In the midst of you stands an encampment very old,	  In the midst of you stands an encampment very old,	  In the midst of you stands an encampment very old,
  Stands forever the camp of that dead brigade.	  Stands forever the camp of that dead brigade.	  Stands forever the camp of that dead brigade.	  Stands forever the camp of that dead brigade.
			
			
			
			
Cavalry Crossing a Ford	Cavalry Crossing a Ford	Cavalry Crossing a Ford	Cavalry Crossing a Ford
			
  A line in long array where they wind betwixt green islands,	  A line in long array where they wind betwixt green islands,	  A line in long array where they wind betwixt green islands,	  A line in long array where they wind betwixt green islands,
  They take a serpentine course, their arms flash in the sun--hark to	  They take a serpentine course, their arms flash in the sun--hark to	  They take a serpentine course, their arms flash in the sun--hark to	  They take a serpentine course, their arms flash in the sun--hark to
      the musical clank,	      the musical clank,	      the musical clank,	      the musical clank,
  Behold the silvery river, in it the splashing horses loitering stop	  Behold the silvery river, in it the splashing horses loitering stop	  Behold the silvery river, in it the splashing horses loitering stop	  Behold the silvery river, in it the splashing horses loitering stop
      to drink,	      to drink,	      to drink,	      to drink,
  Behold the brown-faced men, each group, each person a picture, the	  Behold the brown-faced men, each group, each person a picture, the	  Behold the brown-faced men, each group, each person a picture, the	  Behold the brown-faced men, each group, each person a picture, the
      negligent rest on the saddles,	      negligent rest on the saddles,	      negligent rest on the saddles,	      negligent rest on the saddles,
  Some emerge on the opposite bank, others are just entering the ford--while,	  Some emerge on the opposite bank, others are just entering the ford--while,	  Some emerge on the opposite bank, others are just entering the ford--while,	  Some emerge on the opposite bank, others are just entering the ford--while,
  Scarlet and blue and snowy white,	  Scarlet and blue and snowy white,	  Scarlet and blue and snowy white,	  Scarlet and blue and snowy white,
  The guidon flags flutter gayly in the wind.	  The guidon flags flutter gayly in the wind.	  The guidon flags flutter gayly in the wind.	  The guidon flags flutter gayly in the wind.
			
			
			
			
Bivouac on a Mountain Side	Bivouac on a Mountain Side	Bivouac on a Mountain Side	Bivouac on a Mountain Side
			
  I see before me now a traveling army halting,	  I see before me now a traveling army halting,	  I see before me now a traveling army halting,	  I see before me now a traveling army halting,
  Below a fertile valley spread, with barns and the orchards of summer,	  Below a fertile valley spread, with barns and the orchards of summer,	  Below a fertile valley spread, with barns and the orchards of summer,	  Below a fertile valley spread, with barns and the orchards of summer,
  Behind, the terraced sides of a mountain, abrupt, in places rising high,	  Behind, the terraced sides of a mountain, abrupt, in places rising high,	  Behind, the terraced sides of a mountain, abrupt, in places rising high,	  Behind, the terraced sides of a mountain, abrupt, in places rising high,
  Broken, with rocks, with clinging cedars, with tall shapes dingily seen,	  Broken, with rocks, with clinging cedars, with tall shapes dingily seen,	  Broken, with rocks, with clinging cedars, with tall shapes dingily seen,	  Broken, with rocks, with clinging cedars, with tall shapes dingily seen,
  The numerous camp-fires scatter'd near and far, some away up on the	  The numerous camp-fires scatter'd near and far, some away up on the	  The numerous camp-fires scatter'd near and far, some away up on the	  The numerous camp-fires scatter'd near and far, some away up on the
      mountain,	      mountain,	      mountain,	      mountain,
  The shadowy forms of men and horses, looming, large-sized, flickering,	  The shadowy forms of men and horses, looming, large-sized, flickering,	  The shadowy forms of men and horses, looming, large-sized, flickering,	  The shadowy forms of men and horses, looming, large-sized, flickering,
  And over all the sky--the sky! far, far out of reach, studded,	  And over all the sky--the sky! far, far out of reach, studded,	  And over all the sky--the sky! far, far out of reach, studded,	  And over all the sky--the sky! far, far out of reach, studded,
      breaking out, the eternal stars.	      breaking out, the eternal stars.	      breaking out, the eternal stars.	      breaking out, the eternal stars.
			
			
			
			
An Army Corps on the March	An Army Corps on the March	An Army Corps on the March	An Army Corps on the March
			
  With its cloud of skirmishers in advance,	  With its cloud of skirmishers in advance,	  With its cloud of skirmishers in advance,	  With its cloud of skirmishers in advance,
  With now the sound of a single shot snapping like a whip, and now an	  With now the sound of a single shot snapping like a whip, and now an	  With now the sound of a single shot snapping like a whip, and now an	  With now the sound of a single shot snapping like a whip, and now an
      irregular volley,	      irregular volley,	      irregular volley,	      irregular volley,
  The swarming ranks press on and on, the dense brigades press on,	  The swarming ranks press on and on, the dense brigades press on,	  The swarming ranks press on and on, the dense brigades press on,	  The swarming ranks press on and on, the dense brigades press on,
  Glittering dimly, toiling under the sun--the dust-cover'd men,	  Glittering dimly, toiling under the sun--the dust-cover'd men,	  Glittering dimly, toiling under the sun--the dust-cover'd men,	  Glittering dimly, toiling under the sun--the dust-cover'd men,
  In columns rise and fall to the undulations of the ground,	  In columns rise and fall to the undulations of the ground,	  In columns rise and fall to the undulations of the ground,	  In columns rise and fall to the undulations of the ground,
  With artillery interspers'd--the wheels rumble, the horses sweat,	  With artillery interspers'd--the wheels rumble, the horses sweat,	  With artillery interspers'd--the wheels rumble, the horses sweat,	  With artillery interspers'd--the wheels rumble, the horses sweat,
  As the army corps advances.	  As the army corps advances.	  As the army corps advances.	  As the army corps advances.
			
			
			
			
By the Bivouac's Fitful Flame	By the Bivouac's Fitful Flame	By the Bivouac's Fitful Flame	By the Bivouac's Fitful Flame
			
  By the bivouac's fitful flame,	  By the bivouac's fitful flame,	  By the bivouac's fitful flame,	  By the bivouac's fitful flame,
  A procession winding around me, solemn and sweet and slow--but	  A procession winding around me, solemn and sweet and slow--but	  A procession winding around me, solemn and sweet and slow--but	  A procession winding around me, solemn and sweet and slow--but
      first I note,	      first I note,	      first I note,	      first I note,
  The tents of the sleeping army, the fields' and woods' dim outline,	  The tents of the sleeping army, the fields' and woods' dim outline,	  The tents of the sleeping army, the fields' and woods' dim outline,	  The tents of the sleeping army, the fields' and woods' dim outline,
  The darkness lit by spots of kindled fire, the silence,	  The darkness lit by spots of kindled fire, the silence,	  The darkness lit by spots of kindled fire, the silence,	  The darkness lit by spots of kindled fire, the silence,
  Like a phantom far or near an occasional figure moving,	  Like a phantom far or near an occasional figure moving,	  Like a phantom far or near an occasional figure moving,	  Like a phantom far or near an occasional figure moving,
  The shrubs and trees, (as I lift my eyes they seem to be stealthily	  The shrubs and trees, (as I lift my eyes they seem to be stealthily	  The shrubs and trees, (as I lift my eyes they seem to be stealthily	  The shrubs and trees, (as I lift my eyes they seem to be stealthily
      watching me,)	      watching me,)	      watching me,)	      watching me,)
  While wind in procession thoughts, O tender and wondrous thoughts,	  While wind in procession thoughts, O tender and wondrous thoughts,	  While wind in procession thoughts, O tender and wondrous thoughts,	  While wind in procession thoughts, O tender and wondrous thoughts,
  Of life and death, of home and the past and loved, and of those that	  Of life and death, of home and the past and loved, and of those that	  Of life and death, of home and the past and loved, and of those that	  Of life and death, of home and the past and loved, and of those that
      are far away;	      are far away;	      are far away;	      are far away;
  A solemn and slow procession there as I sit on the ground,	  A solemn and slow procession there as I sit on the ground,	  A solemn and slow procession there as I sit on the ground,	  A solemn and slow procession there as I sit on the ground,
  By the bivouac's fitful flame.	  By the bivouac's fitful flame.	  By the bivouac's fitful flame.	  By the bivouac's fitful flame.
			
			
			
			
Come Up from the Fields Father	Come Up from the Fields Father	Come Up from the Fields Father	Come Up from the Fields Father
			
  Come up from the fields father, here's a letter from our Pete,	  Come up from the fields father, here's a letter from our Pete,	  Come up from the fields father, here's a letter from our Pete,	  Come up from the fields father, here's a letter from our Pete,
  And come to the front door mother, here's a letter from thy dear son.	  And come to the front door mother, here's a letter from thy dear son.	  And come to the front door mother, here's a letter from thy dear son.	  And come to the front door mother, here's a letter from thy dear son.
			
  Lo, 'tis autumn,	  Lo, 'tis autumn,	  Lo, 'tis autumn,	  Lo, 'tis autumn,
  Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,	  Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,	  Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,	  Lo, where the trees, deeper green, yellower and redder,
  Cool and sweeten Ohio's villages with leaves fluttering in the	  Cool and sweeten Ohio's villages with leaves fluttering in the	  Cool and sweeten Ohio's villages with leaves fluttering in the	  Cool and sweeten Ohio's villages with leaves fluttering in the
      moderate wind,	      moderate wind,	      moderate wind,	      moderate wind,
  Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis'd vines,	  Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis'd vines,	  Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis'd vines,	  Where apples ripe in the orchards hang and grapes on the trellis'd vines,
  (Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?	  (Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?	  (Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?	  (Smell you the smell of the grapes on the vines?
  Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?)	  Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?)	  Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?)	  Smell you the buckwheat where the bees were lately buzzing?)
			
  Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and	  Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and	  Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and	  Above all, lo, the sky so calm, so transparent after the rain, and
      with wondrous clouds,	      with wondrous clouds,	      with wondrous clouds,	      with wondrous clouds,
  Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers well.	  Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers well.	  Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers well.	  Below too, all calm, all vital and beautiful, and the farm prospers well.
			
  Down in the fields all prospers well,	  Down in the fields all prospers well,	  Down in the fields all prospers well,	  Down in the fields all prospers well,
  But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter's call.	  But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter's call.	  But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter's call.	  But now from the fields come father, come at the daughter's call.
  And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.	  And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.	  And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.	  And come to the entry mother, to the front door come right away.
			
  Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,	  Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,	  Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,	  Fast as she can she hurries, something ominous, her steps trembling,
  She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.	  She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.	  She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.	  She does not tarry to smooth her hair nor adjust her cap.
			
  Open the envelope quickly,	  Open the envelope quickly,	  Open the envelope quickly,	  Open the envelope quickly,
  O this is not our son's writing, yet his name is sign'd,	  O this is not our son's writing, yet his name is sign'd,	  O this is not our son's writing, yet his name is sign'd,	  O this is not our son's writing, yet his name is sign'd,
  O a strange hand writes for our dear son, O stricken mother's soul!	  O a strange hand writes for our dear son, O stricken mother's soul!	  O a strange hand writes for our dear son, O stricken mother's soul!	  O a strange hand writes for our dear son, O stricken mother's soul!
  All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main	  All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main	  All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main	  All swims before her eyes, flashes with black, she catches the main
      words only,	      words only,	      words only,	      words only,
  Sentences broken, gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish,	  Sentences broken, gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish,	  Sentences broken, gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish,	  Sentences broken, gunshot wound in the breast, cavalry skirmish,
      taken to hospital,	      taken to hospital,	      taken to hospital,	      taken to hospital,
  At present low, but will soon be better.	  At present low, but will soon be better.	  At present low, but will soon be better.	  At present low, but will soon be better.
			
  Ah now the single figure to me,	  Ah now the single figure to me,	  Ah now the single figure to me,	  Ah now the single figure to me,
  Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,	  Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,	  Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,	  Amid all teeming and wealthy Ohio with all its cities and farms,
  Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,	  Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,	  Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,	  Sickly white in the face and dull in the head, very faint,
  By the jamb of a door leans.	  By the jamb of a door leans.	  By the jamb of a door leans.	  By the jamb of a door leans.
			
  Grieve not so, dear mother, (the just-grown daughter speaks through	  Grieve not so, dear mother, (the just-grown daughter speaks through	  Grieve not so, dear mother, (the just-grown daughter speaks through	  Grieve not so, dear mother, (the just-grown daughter speaks through
      her sobs,	      her sobs,	      her sobs,	      her sobs,
  The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay'd,)	  The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay'd,)	  The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay'd,)	  The little sisters huddle around speechless and dismay'd,)
  See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better.	  See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better.	  See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better.	  See, dearest mother, the letter says Pete will soon be better.
			
  Alas poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be needs to be	  Alas poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be needs to be	  Alas poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be needs to be	  Alas poor boy, he will never be better, (nor may-be needs to be
      better, that brave and simple soul,)	      better, that brave and simple soul,)	      better, that brave and simple soul,)	      better, that brave and simple soul,)
  While they stand at home at the door he is dead already,	  While they stand at home at the door he is dead already,	  While they stand at home at the door he is dead already,	  While they stand at home at the door he is dead already,
  The only son is dead.	  The only son is dead.	  The only son is dead.	  The only son is dead.
			
  But the mother needs to be better,	  But the mother needs to be better,	  But the mother needs to be better,	  But the mother needs to be better,
  She with thin form presently drest in black,	  She with thin form presently drest in black,	  She with thin form presently drest in black,	  She with thin form presently drest in black,
  By day her meals untouch'd, then at night fitfully sleeping, often waking,	  By day her meals untouch'd, then at night fitfully sleeping, often waking,	  By day her meals untouch'd, then at night fitfully sleeping, often waking,	  By day her meals untouch'd, then at night fitfully sleeping, often waking,
  In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,	  In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,	  In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,	  In the midnight waking, weeping, longing with one deep longing,
  O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and withdraw,	  O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and withdraw,	  O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and withdraw,	  O that she might withdraw unnoticed, silent from life escape and withdraw,
  To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.	  To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.	  To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.	  To follow, to seek, to be with her dear dead son.
			
			
			
			
Vigil Strange I Kept on the Field One Night	Vigil Strange I Kept on the Field One Night	Vigil Strange I Kept on the Field One Night	Vigil Strange I Kept on the Field One Night
			
  Vigil strange I kept on the field one night;	  Vigil strange I kept on the field one night;	  Vigil strange I kept on the field one night;	  Vigil strange I kept on the field one night;
  When you my son and my comrade dropt at my side that day,	  When you my son and my comrade dropt at my side that day,	  When you my son and my comrade dropt at my side that day,	  When you my son and my comrade dropt at my side that day,
  One look I but gave which your dear eyes return'd with a look I	  One look I but gave which your dear eyes return'd with a look I	  One look I but gave which your dear eyes return'd with a look I	  One look I but gave which your dear eyes return'd with a look I
      shall never forget,	      shall never forget,	      shall never forget,	      shall never forget,
  One touch of your hand to mine O boy, reach'd up as you lay on the ground,	  One touch of your hand to mine O boy, reach'd up as you lay on the ground,	  One touch of your hand to mine O boy, reach'd up as you lay on the ground,	  One touch of your hand to mine O boy, reach'd up as you lay on the ground,
  Then onward I sped in the battle, the even-contested battle,	  Then onward I sped in the battle, the even-contested battle,	  Then onward I sped in the battle, the even-contested battle,	  Then onward I sped in the battle, the even-contested battle,
  Till late in the night reliev'd to the place at last again I made my way,	  Till late in the night reliev'd to the place at last again I made my way,	  Till late in the night reliev'd to the place at last again I made my way,	  Till late in the night reliev'd to the place at last again I made my way,
  Found you in death so cold dear comrade, found your body son of	  Found you in death so cold dear comrade, found your body son of	  Found you in death so cold dear comrade, found your body son of	  Found you in death so cold dear comrade, found your body son of
      responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)	      responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)	      responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)	      responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)
  Bared your face in the starlight, curious the scene, cool blew the	  Bared your face in the starlight, curious the scene, cool blew the	  Bared your face in the starlight, curious the scene, cool blew the	  Bared your face in the starlight, curious the scene, cool blew the
      moderate night-wind,	      moderate night-wind,	      moderate night-wind,	      moderate night-wind,
  Long there and then in vigil I stood, dimly around me the	  Long there and then in vigil I stood, dimly around me the	  Long there and then in vigil I stood, dimly around me the	  Long there and then in vigil I stood, dimly around me the
      battlefield spreading,	      battlefield spreading,	      battlefield spreading,	      battlefield spreading,
  Vigil wondrous and vigil sweet there in the fragrant silent night,	  Vigil wondrous and vigil sweet there in the fragrant silent night,	  Vigil wondrous and vigil sweet there in the fragrant silent night,	  Vigil wondrous and vigil sweet there in the fragrant silent night,
  But not a tear fell, not even a long-drawn sigh, long, long I gazed,	  But not a tear fell, not even a long-drawn sigh, long, long I gazed,	  But not a tear fell, not even a long-drawn sigh, long, long I gazed,	  But not a tear fell, not even a long-drawn sigh, long, long I gazed,
  Then on the earth partially reclining sat by your side leaning my	  Then on the earth partially reclining sat by your side leaning my	  Then on the earth partially reclining sat by your side leaning my	  Then on the earth partially reclining sat by your side leaning my
      chin in my hands,	      chin in my hands,	      chin in my hands,	      chin in my hands,
  Passing sweet hours, immortal and mystic hours with you dearest	  Passing sweet hours, immortal and mystic hours with you dearest	  Passing sweet hours, immortal and mystic hours with you dearest	  Passing sweet hours, immortal and mystic hours with you dearest
      comrade--not a tear, not a word,	      comrade--not a tear, not a word,	      comrade--not a tear, not a word,	      comrade--not a tear, not a word,
  Vigil of silence, love and death, vigil for you my son and my soldier,	  Vigil of silence, love and death, vigil for you my son and my soldier,	  Vigil of silence, love and death, vigil for you my son and my soldier,	  Vigil of silence, love and death, vigil for you my son and my soldier,
  As onward silently stars aloft, eastward new ones upward stole,	  As onward silently stars aloft, eastward new ones upward stole,	  As onward silently stars aloft, eastward new ones upward stole,	  As onward silently stars aloft, eastward new ones upward stole,
  Vigil final for you brave boy, (I could not save you, swift was your death,	  Vigil final for you brave boy, (I could not save you, swift was your death,	  Vigil final for you brave boy, (I could not save you, swift was your death,	  Vigil final for you brave boy, (I could not save you, swift was your death,
  I faithfully loved you and cared for you living, I think we shall	  I faithfully loved you and cared for you living, I think we shall	  I faithfully loved you and cared for you living, I think we shall	  I faithfully loved you and cared for you living, I think we shall
      surely meet again,)	      surely meet again,)	      surely meet again,)	      surely meet again,)
  Till at latest lingering of the night, indeed just as the dawn appear'd,	  Till at latest lingering of the night, indeed just as the dawn appear'd,	  Till at latest lingering of the night, indeed just as the dawn appear'd,	  Till at latest lingering of the night, indeed just as the dawn appear'd,
  My comrade I wrapt in his blanket, envelop'd well his form,	  My comrade I wrapt in his blanket, envelop'd well his form,	  My comrade I wrapt in his blanket, envelop'd well his form,	  My comrade I wrapt in his blanket, envelop'd well his form,
  Folded the blanket well, tucking it carefully over head and	  Folded the blanket well, tucking it carefully over head and	  Folded the blanket well, tucking it carefully over head and	  Folded the blanket well, tucking it carefully over head and
      carefully under feet,	      carefully under feet,	      carefully under feet,	      carefully under feet,
  And there and then and bathed by the rising sun, my son in his	  And there and then and bathed by the rising sun, my son in his	  And there and then and bathed by the rising sun, my son in his	  And there and then and bathed by the rising sun, my son in his
      grave, in his rude-dug grave I deposited,	      grave, in his rude-dug grave I deposited,	      grave, in his rude-dug grave I deposited,	      grave, in his rude-dug grave I deposited,
  Ending my vigil strange with that, vigil of night and battle-field dim,	  Ending my vigil strange with that, vigil of night and battle-field dim,	  Ending my vigil strange with that, vigil of night and battle-field dim,	  Ending my vigil strange with that, vigil of night and battle-field dim,
  Vigil for boy of responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)	  Vigil for boy of responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)	  Vigil for boy of responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)	  Vigil for boy of responding kisses, (never again on earth responding,)
  Vigil for comrade swiftly slain, vigil I never forget, how as day	  Vigil for comrade swiftly slain, vigil I never forget, how as day	  Vigil for comrade swiftly slain, vigil I never forget, how as day	  Vigil for comrade swiftly slain, vigil I never forget, how as day
      brighten'd,	      brighten'd,	      brighten'd,	      brighten'd,
  I rose from the chill ground and folded my soldier well in his blanket,	  I rose from the chill ground and folded my soldier well in his blanket,	  I rose from the chill ground and folded my soldier well in his blanket,	  I rose from the chill ground and folded my soldier well in his blanket,
  And buried him where he fell.	  And buried him where he fell.	  And buried him where he fell.	  And buried him where he fell.
			
			
			
			
A March in the Ranks Hard-Prest, and the Road Unknown	A March in the Ranks Hard-Prest, and the Road Unknown	A March in the Ranks Hard-Prest, and the Road Unknown	A March in the Ranks Hard-Prest, and the Road Unknown
			
  A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown,	  A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown,	  A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown,	  A march in the ranks hard-prest, and the road unknown,
  A route through a heavy wood with muffled steps in the darkness,	  A route through a heavy wood with muffled steps in the darkness,	  A route through a heavy wood with muffled steps in the darkness,	  A route through a heavy wood with muffled steps in the darkness,
  Our army foil'd with loss severe, and the sullen remnant retreating,	  Our army foil'd with loss severe, and the sullen remnant retreating,	  Our army foil'd with loss severe, and the sullen remnant retreating,	  Our army foil'd with loss severe, and the sullen remnant retreating,
  Till after midnight glimmer upon us the lights of a dim-lighted building,	  Till after midnight glimmer upon us the lights of a dim-lighted building,	  Till after midnight glimmer upon us the lights of a dim-lighted building,	  Till after midnight glimmer upon us the lights of a dim-lighted building,
  We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the dim-lighted building,	  We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the dim-lighted building,	  We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the dim-lighted building,	  We come to an open space in the woods, and halt by the dim-lighted building,
  'Tis a large old church at the crossing roads, now an impromptu hospital,	  'Tis a large old church at the crossing roads, now an impromptu hospital,	  'Tis a large old church at the crossing roads, now an impromptu hospital,	  'Tis a large old church at the crossing roads, now an impromptu hospital,
  Entering but for a minute I see a sight beyond all the pictures and	  Entering but for a minute I see a sight beyond all the pictures and	  Entering but for a minute I see a sight beyond all the pictures and	  Entering but for a minute I see a sight beyond all the pictures and
      poems ever made,	      poems ever made,	      poems ever made,	      poems ever made,
  Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving candles and lamps,	  Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving candles and lamps,	  Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving candles and lamps,	  Shadows of deepest, deepest black, just lit by moving candles and lamps,
  And by one great pitchy torch stationary with wild red flame and	  And by one great pitchy torch stationary with wild red flame and	  And by one great pitchy torch stationary with wild red flame and	  And by one great pitchy torch stationary with wild red flame and
      clouds of smoke,	      clouds of smoke,	      clouds of smoke,	      clouds of smoke,
  By these, crowds, groups of forms vaguely I see on the floor, some	  By these, crowds, groups of forms vaguely I see on the floor, some	  By these, crowds, groups of forms vaguely I see on the floor, some	  By these, crowds, groups of forms vaguely I see on the floor, some
      in the pews laid down,	      in the pews laid down,	      in the pews laid down,	      in the pews laid down,
  At my feet more distinctly a soldier, a mere lad, in danger of	  At my feet more distinctly a soldier, a mere lad, in danger of	  At my feet more distinctly a soldier, a mere lad, in danger of	  At my feet more distinctly a soldier, a mere lad, in danger of
      bleeding to death, (he is shot in the abdomen,)	      bleeding to death, (he is shot in the abdomen,)	      bleeding to death, (he is shot in the abdomen,)	      bleeding to death, (he is shot in the abdomen,)
  I stanch the blood temporarily, (the youngster's face is white as a lily,)	  I stanch the blood temporarily, (the youngster's face is white as a lily,)	  I stanch the blood temporarily, (the youngster's face is white as a lily,)	  I stanch the blood temporarily, (the youngster's face is white as a lily,)
  Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o'er the scene fain to absorb it all,	  Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o'er the scene fain to absorb it all,	  Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o'er the scene fain to absorb it all,	  Then before I depart I sweep my eyes o'er the scene fain to absorb it all,
  Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in obscurity,	  Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in obscurity,	  Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in obscurity,	  Faces, varieties, postures beyond description, most in obscurity,
      some of them dead,	      some of them dead,	      some of them dead,	      some of them dead,
  Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell of ether,	  Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell of ether,	  Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell of ether,	  Surgeons operating, attendants holding lights, the smell of ether,
      odor of blood,	      odor of blood,	      odor of blood,	      odor of blood,
  The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms, the yard outside also fill'd,	  The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms, the yard outside also fill'd,	  The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms, the yard outside also fill'd,	  The crowd, O the crowd of the bloody forms, the yard outside also fill'd,
  Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers, some in the	  Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers, some in the	  Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers, some in the	  Some on the bare ground, some on planks or stretchers, some in the
      death-spasm sweating,	      death-spasm sweating,	      death-spasm sweating,	      death-spasm sweating,
  An occasional scream or cry, the doctor's shouted orders or calls,	  An occasional scream or cry, the doctor's shouted orders or calls,	  An occasional scream or cry, the doctor's shouted orders or calls,	  An occasional scream or cry, the doctor's shouted orders or calls,
  The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the glint of	  The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the glint of	  The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the glint of	  The glisten of the little steel instruments catching the glint of
      the torches,	      the torches,	      the torches,	      the torches,
  These I resume as I chant, I see again the forms, I smell the odor,	  These I resume as I chant, I see again the forms, I smell the odor,	  These I resume as I chant, I see again the forms, I smell the odor,	  These I resume as I chant, I see again the forms, I smell the odor,
  Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, fall in;	  Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, fall in;	  Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, fall in;	  Then hear outside the orders given, Fall in, my men, fall in;
  But first I bend to the dying lad, his eyes open, a half-smile gives he me,	  But first I bend to the dying lad, his eyes open, a half-smile gives he me,	  But first I bend to the dying lad, his eyes open, a half-smile gives he me,	  But first I bend to the dying lad, his eyes open, a half-smile gives he me,
  Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to the darkness,	  Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to the darkness,	  Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to the darkness,	  Then the eyes close, calmly close, and I speed forth to the darkness,
  Resuming, marching, ever in darkness marching, on in the ranks,	  Resuming, marching, ever in darkness marching, on in the ranks,	  Resuming, marching, ever in darkness marching, on in the ranks,	  Resuming, marching, ever in darkness marching, on in the ranks,
  The unknown road still marching.	  The unknown road still marching.	  The unknown road still marching.	  The unknown road still marching.
			
			
			
			
A Sight in Camp in the Daybreak Gray and Dim	A Sight in Camp in the Daybreak Gray and Dim	A Sight in Camp in the Daybreak Gray and Dim	A Sight in Camp in the Daybreak Gray and Dim
			
  A sight in camp in the daybreak gray and dim,	  A sight in camp in the daybreak gray and dim,	  A sight in camp in the daybreak gray and dim,	  A sight in camp in the daybreak gray and dim,
  As from my tent I emerge so early sleepless,	  As from my tent I emerge so early sleepless,	  As from my tent I emerge so early sleepless,	  As from my tent I emerge so early sleepless,
  As slow I walk in the cool fresh air the path near by the hospital tent,	  As slow I walk in the cool fresh air the path near by the hospital tent,	  As slow I walk in the cool fresh air the path near by the hospital tent,	  As slow I walk in the cool fresh air the path near by the hospital tent,
  Three forms I see on stretchers lying, brought out there untended lying,	  Three forms I see on stretchers lying, brought out there untended lying,	  Three forms I see on stretchers lying, brought out there untended lying,	  Three forms I see on stretchers lying, brought out there untended lying,
  Over each the blanket spread, ample brownish woolen blanket,	  Over each the blanket spread, ample brownish woolen blanket,	  Over each the blanket spread, ample brownish woolen blanket,	  Over each the blanket spread, ample brownish woolen blanket,
  Gray and heavy blanket, folding, covering all.	  Gray and heavy blanket, folding, covering all.	  Gray and heavy blanket, folding, covering all.	  Gray and heavy blanket, folding, covering all.
			
  Curious I halt and silent stand,	  Curious I halt and silent stand,	  Curious I halt and silent stand,	  Curious I halt and silent stand,
  Then with light fingers I from the face of the nearest the first	  Then with light fingers I from the face of the nearest the first	  Then with light fingers I from the face of the nearest the first	  Then with light fingers I from the face of the nearest the first
      just lift the blanket;	      just lift the blanket;	      just lift the blanket;	      just lift the blanket;
  Who are you elderly man so gaunt and grim, with well-gray'd hair,	  Who are you elderly man so gaunt and grim, with well-gray'd hair,	  Who are you elderly man so gaunt and grim, with well-gray'd hair,	  Who are you elderly man so gaunt and grim, with well-gray'd hair,
      and flesh all sunken about the eyes?	      and flesh all sunken about the eyes?	      and flesh all sunken about the eyes?	      and flesh all sunken about the eyes?
  Who are you my dear comrade?	  Who are you my dear comrade?	  Who are you my dear comrade?	  Who are you my dear comrade?
  Then to the second I step--and who are you my child and darling?	  Then to the second I step--and who are you my child and darling?	  Then to the second I step--and who are you my child and darling?	  Then to the second I step--and who are you my child and darling?
  Who are you sweet boy with cheeks yet blooming?	  Who are you sweet boy with cheeks yet blooming?	  Who are you sweet boy with cheeks yet blooming?	  Who are you sweet boy with cheeks yet blooming?
  Then to the third--a face nor child nor old, very calm, as of	  Then to the third--a face nor child nor old, very calm, as of	  Then to the third--a face nor child nor old, very calm, as of	  Then to the third--a face nor child nor old, very calm, as of
      beautiful yellow-white ivory;	      beautiful yellow-white ivory;	      beautiful yellow-white ivory;	      beautiful yellow-white ivory;
  Young man I think I know you--I think this face is the face of the	  Young man I think I know you--I think this face is the face of the	  Young man I think I know you--I think this face is the face of the	  Young man I think I know you--I think this face is the face of the
      Christ himself,	      Christ himself,	      Christ himself,	      Christ himself,
  Dead and divine and brother of all, and here again he lies.	  Dead and divine and brother of all, and here again he lies.	  Dead and divine and brother of all, and here again he lies.	  Dead and divine and brother of all, and here again he lies.
			
			
			
			
As Toilsome I Wander'd Virginia's Woods	As Toilsome I Wander'd Virginia's Woods	As Toilsome I Wander'd Virginia's Woods	As Toilsome I Wander'd Virginia's Woods
			
  As toilsome I wander'd Virginia's woods,	  As toilsome I wander'd Virginia's woods,	  As toilsome I wander'd Virginia's woods,	  As toilsome I wander'd Virginia's woods,
  To the music of rustling leaves kick'd by my feet, (for 'twas autumn,)	  To the music of rustling leaves kick'd by my feet, (for 'twas autumn,)	  To the music of rustling leaves kick'd by my feet, (for 'twas autumn,)	  To the music of rustling leaves kick'd by my feet, (for 'twas autumn,)
  I mark'd at the foot of a tree the grave of a soldier;	  I mark'd at the foot of a tree the grave of a soldier;	  I mark'd at the foot of a tree the grave of a soldier;	  I mark'd at the foot of a tree the grave of a soldier;
  Mortally wounded he and buried on the retreat, (easily all could	  Mortally wounded he and buried on the retreat, (easily all could	  Mortally wounded he and buried on the retreat, (easily all could	  Mortally wounded he and buried on the retreat, (easily all could
      understand,)	      understand,)	      understand,)	      understand,)
  The halt of a mid-day hour, when up! no time to lose--yet this sign left,	  The halt of a mid-day hour, when up! no time to lose--yet this sign left,	  The halt of a mid-day hour, when up! no time to lose--yet this sign left,	  The halt of a mid-day hour, when up! no time to lose--yet this sign left,
  On a tablet scrawl'd and nail'd on the tree by the grave,	  On a tablet scrawl'd and nail'd on the tree by the grave,	  On a tablet scrawl'd and nail'd on the tree by the grave,	  On a tablet scrawl'd and nail'd on the tree by the grave,
  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.	  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.	  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.	  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.
			
  Long, long I muse, then on my way go wandering,	  Long, long I muse, then on my way go wandering,	  Long, long I muse, then on my way go wandering,	  Long, long I muse, then on my way go wandering,
  Many a changeful season to follow, and many a scene of life,	  Many a changeful season to follow, and many a scene of life,	  Many a changeful season to follow, and many a scene of life,	  Many a changeful season to follow, and many a scene of life,
  Yet at times through changeful season and scene, abrupt, alone, or	  Yet at times through changeful season and scene, abrupt, alone, or	  Yet at times through changeful season and scene, abrupt, alone, or	  Yet at times through changeful season and scene, abrupt, alone, or
      in the crowded street,	      in the crowded street,	      in the crowded street,	      in the crowded street,
  Comes before me the unknown soldier's grave, comes the inscription	  Comes before me the unknown soldier's grave, comes the inscription	  Comes before me the unknown soldier's grave, comes the inscription	  Comes before me the unknown soldier's grave, comes the inscription
      rude in Virginia's woods,	      rude in Virginia's woods,	      rude in Virginia's woods,	      rude in Virginia's woods,
  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.	  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.	  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.	  Bold, cautious, true, and my loving comrade.
			
			
			
			
Not the Pilot	Not the Pilot	Not the Pilot	Not the Pilot
			
  Not the pilot has charged himself to bring his ship into port,	  Not the pilot has charged himself to bring his ship into port,	  Not the pilot has charged himself to bring his ship into port,	  Not the pilot has charged himself to bring his ship into port,
      though beaten back and many times baffled;	      though beaten back and many times baffled;	      though beaten back and many times baffled;	      though beaten back and many times baffled;
  Not the pathfinder penetrating inland weary and long,	  Not the pathfinder penetrating inland weary and long,	  Not the pathfinder penetrating inland weary and long,	  Not the pathfinder penetrating inland weary and long,
  By deserts parch'd, snows chill'd, rivers wet, perseveres till he	  By deserts parch'd, snows chill'd, rivers wet, perseveres till he	  By deserts parch'd, snows chill'd, rivers wet, perseveres till he	  By deserts parch'd, snows chill'd, rivers wet, perseveres till he
      reaches his destination,	      reaches his destination,	      reaches his destination,	      reaches his destination,
  More than I have charged myself, heeded or unheeded, to compose	  More than I have charged myself, heeded or unheeded, to compose	  More than I have charged myself, heeded or unheeded, to compose	  More than I have charged myself, heeded or unheeded, to compose
      march for these States,	      march for these States,	      march for these States,	      march for these States,
  For a battle-call, rousing to arms if need be, years, centuries hence.	  For a battle-call, rousing to arms if need be, years, centuries hence.	  For a battle-call, rousing to arms if need be, years, centuries hence.	  For a battle-call, rousing to arms if need be, years, centuries hence.
			
			
			
			
Year That Trembled and Reel'd Beneath Me	Year That Trembled and Reel'd Beneath Me	Year That Trembled and Reel'd Beneath Me	Year That Trembled and Reel'd Beneath Me
			
  Year that trembled and reel'd beneath me!	  Year that trembled and reel'd beneath me!	  Year that trembled and reel'd beneath me!	  Year that trembled and reel'd beneath me!
  Your summer wind was warm enough, yet the air I breathed froze me,	  Your summer wind was warm enough, yet the air I breathed froze me,	  Your summer wind was warm enough, yet the air I breathed froze me,	  Your summer wind was warm enough, yet the air I breathed froze me,
  A thick gloom fell through the sunshine and darken'd me,	  A thick gloom fell through the sunshine and darken'd me,	  A thick gloom fell through the sunshine and darken'd me,	  A thick gloom fell through the sunshine and darken'd me,
  Must I change my triumphant songs? said I to myself,	  Must I change my triumphant songs? said I to myself,	  Must I change my triumphant songs? said I to myself,	  Must I change my triumphant songs? said I to myself,
  Must I indeed learn to chant the cold dirges of the baffled?	  Must I indeed learn to chant the cold dirges of the baffled?	  Must I indeed learn to chant the cold dirges of the baffled?	  Must I indeed learn to chant the cold dirges of the baffled?
  And sullen hymns of defeat?	  And sullen hymns of defeat?	  And sullen hymns of defeat?	  And sullen hymns of defeat?
			
			
			
			
The Wound-Dresser	The Wound-Dresser	The Wound-Dresser	The Wound-Dresser
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  An old man bending I come among new faces,	  An old man bending I come among new faces,	  An old man bending I come among new faces,	  An old man bending I come among new faces,
  Years looking backward resuming in answer to children,	  Years looking backward resuming in answer to children,	  Years looking backward resuming in answer to children,	  Years looking backward resuming in answer to children,
  Come tell us old man, as from young men and maidens that love me,	  Come tell us old man, as from young men and maidens that love me,	  Come tell us old man, as from young men and maidens that love me,	  Come tell us old man, as from young men and maidens that love me,
  (Arous'd and angry, I'd thought to beat the alarum, and urge relentless war,	  (Arous'd and angry, I'd thought to beat the alarum, and urge relentless war,	  (Arous'd and angry, I'd thought to beat the alarum, and urge relentless war,	  (Arous'd and angry, I'd thought to beat the alarum, and urge relentless war,
  But soon my fingers fail'd me, my face droop'd and I resign'd myself,	  But soon my fingers fail'd me, my face droop'd and I resign'd myself,	  But soon my fingers fail'd me, my face droop'd and I resign'd myself,	  But soon my fingers fail'd me, my face droop'd and I resign'd myself,
  To sit by the wounded and soothe them, or silently watch the dead;)	  To sit by the wounded and soothe them, or silently watch the dead;)	  To sit by the wounded and soothe them, or silently watch the dead;)	  To sit by the wounded and soothe them, or silently watch the dead;)
  Years hence of these scenes, of these furious passions, these chances,	  Years hence of these scenes, of these furious passions, these chances,	  Years hence of these scenes, of these furious passions, these chances,	  Years hence of these scenes, of these furious passions, these chances,
  Of unsurpass'd heroes, (was one side so brave? the other was equally brave;)	  Of unsurpass'd heroes, (was one side so brave? the other was equally brave;)	  Of unsurpass'd heroes, (was one side so brave? the other was equally brave;)	  Of unsurpass'd heroes, (was one side so brave? the other was equally brave;)
  Now be witness again, paint the mightiest armies of earth,	  Now be witness again, paint the mightiest armies of earth,	  Now be witness again, paint the mightiest armies of earth,	  Now be witness again, paint the mightiest armies of earth,
  Of those armies so rapid so wondrous what saw you to tell us?	  Of those armies so rapid so wondrous what saw you to tell us?	  Of those armies so rapid so wondrous what saw you to tell us?	  Of those armies so rapid so wondrous what saw you to tell us?
  What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious panics,	  What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious panics,	  What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious panics,	  What stays with you latest and deepest? of curious panics,
  Of hard-fought engagements or sieges tremendous what deepest remains?	  Of hard-fought engagements or sieges tremendous what deepest remains?	  Of hard-fought engagements or sieges tremendous what deepest remains?	  Of hard-fought engagements or sieges tremendous what deepest remains?
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  O maidens and young men I love and that love me,	  O maidens and young men I love and that love me,	  O maidens and young men I love and that love me,	  O maidens and young men I love and that love me,
  What you ask of my days those the strangest and sudden your talking recalls,	  What you ask of my days those the strangest and sudden your talking recalls,	  What you ask of my days those the strangest and sudden your talking recalls,	  What you ask of my days those the strangest and sudden your talking recalls,
  Soldier alert I arrive after a long march cover'd with sweat and dust,	  Soldier alert I arrive after a long march cover'd with sweat and dust,	  Soldier alert I arrive after a long march cover'd with sweat and dust,	  Soldier alert I arrive after a long march cover'd with sweat and dust,
  In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly shout in the	  In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly shout in the	  In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly shout in the	  In the nick of time I come, plunge in the fight, loudly shout in the
      rush of successful charge,	      rush of successful charge,	      rush of successful charge,	      rush of successful charge,
  Enter the captur'd works--yet lo, like a swift-running river they fade,	  Enter the captur'd works--yet lo, like a swift-running river they fade,	  Enter the captur'd works--yet lo, like a swift-running river they fade,	  Enter the captur'd works--yet lo, like a swift-running river they fade,
  Pass and are gone they fade--I dwell not on soldiers' perils or	  Pass and are gone they fade--I dwell not on soldiers' perils or	  Pass and are gone they fade--I dwell not on soldiers' perils or	  Pass and are gone they fade--I dwell not on soldiers' perils or
      soldiers' joys,	      soldiers' joys,	      soldiers' joys,	      soldiers' joys,
  (Both I remember well--many the hardships, few the joys, yet I was content.)	  (Both I remember well--many the hardships, few the joys, yet I was content.)	  (Both I remember well--many the hardships, few the joys, yet I was content.)	  (Both I remember well--many the hardships, few the joys, yet I was content.)
			
  But in silence, in dreams' projections,	  But in silence, in dreams' projections,	  But in silence, in dreams' projections,	  But in silence, in dreams' projections,
  While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes on,	  While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes on,	  While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes on,	  While the world of gain and appearance and mirth goes on,
  So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the imprints off the sand,	  So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the imprints off the sand,	  So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the imprints off the sand,	  So soon what is over forgotten, and waves wash the imprints off the sand,
  With hinged knees returning I enter the doors, (while for you up there,	  With hinged knees returning I enter the doors, (while for you up there,	  With hinged knees returning I enter the doors, (while for you up there,	  With hinged knees returning I enter the doors, (while for you up there,
  Whoever you are, follow without noise and be of strong heart.)	  Whoever you are, follow without noise and be of strong heart.)	  Whoever you are, follow without noise and be of strong heart.)	  Whoever you are, follow without noise and be of strong heart.)
			
  Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,	  Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,	  Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,	  Bearing the bandages, water and sponge,
  Straight and swift to my wounded I go,	  Straight and swift to my wounded I go,	  Straight and swift to my wounded I go,	  Straight and swift to my wounded I go,
  Where they lie on the ground after the battle brought in,	  Where they lie on the ground after the battle brought in,	  Where they lie on the ground after the battle brought in,	  Where they lie on the ground after the battle brought in,
  Where their priceless blood reddens the grass the ground,	  Where their priceless blood reddens the grass the ground,	  Where their priceless blood reddens the grass the ground,	  Where their priceless blood reddens the grass the ground,
  Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof'd hospital,	  Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof'd hospital,	  Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof'd hospital,	  Or to the rows of the hospital tent, or under the roof'd hospital,
  To the long rows of cots up and down each side I return,	  To the long rows of cots up and down each side I return,	  To the long rows of cots up and down each side I return,	  To the long rows of cots up and down each side I return,
  To each and all one after another I draw near, not one do I miss,	  To each and all one after another I draw near, not one do I miss,	  To each and all one after another I draw near, not one do I miss,	  To each and all one after another I draw near, not one do I miss,
  An attendant follows holding a tray, he carries a refuse pail,	  An attendant follows holding a tray, he carries a refuse pail,	  An attendant follows holding a tray, he carries a refuse pail,	  An attendant follows holding a tray, he carries a refuse pail,
  Soon to be fill'd with clotted rags and blood, emptied, and fill'd again.	  Soon to be fill'd with clotted rags and blood, emptied, and fill'd again.	  Soon to be fill'd with clotted rags and blood, emptied, and fill'd again.	  Soon to be fill'd with clotted rags and blood, emptied, and fill'd again.
			
  I onward go, I stop,	  I onward go, I stop,	  I onward go, I stop,	  I onward go, I stop,
  With hinged knees and steady hand to dress wounds,	  With hinged knees and steady hand to dress wounds,	  With hinged knees and steady hand to dress wounds,	  With hinged knees and steady hand to dress wounds,
  I am firm with each, the pangs are sharp yet unavoidable,	  I am firm with each, the pangs are sharp yet unavoidable,	  I am firm with each, the pangs are sharp yet unavoidable,	  I am firm with each, the pangs are sharp yet unavoidable,
  One turns to me his appealing eyes--poor boy! I never knew you,	  One turns to me his appealing eyes--poor boy! I never knew you,	  One turns to me his appealing eyes--poor boy! I never knew you,	  One turns to me his appealing eyes--poor boy! I never knew you,
  Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for you, if that	  Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for you, if that	  Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for you, if that	  Yet I think I could not refuse this moment to die for you, if that
      would save you.	      would save you.	      would save you.	      would save you.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  On, on I go, (open doors of time! open hospital doors!)	  On, on I go, (open doors of time! open hospital doors!)	  On, on I go, (open doors of time! open hospital doors!)	  On, on I go, (open doors of time! open hospital doors!)
  The crush'd head I dress, (poor crazed hand tear not the bandage away,)	  The crush'd head I dress, (poor crazed hand tear not the bandage away,)	  The crush'd head I dress, (poor crazed hand tear not the bandage away,)	  The crush'd head I dress, (poor crazed hand tear not the bandage away,)
  The neck of the cavalry-man with the bullet through and through examine,	  The neck of the cavalry-man with the bullet through and through examine,	  The neck of the cavalry-man with the bullet through and through examine,	  The neck of the cavalry-man with the bullet through and through examine,
  Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye, yet life	  Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye, yet life	  Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye, yet life	  Hard the breathing rattles, quite glazed already the eye, yet life
      struggles hard,	      struggles hard,	      struggles hard,	      struggles hard,
  (Come sweet death! be persuaded O beautiful death!	  (Come sweet death! be persuaded O beautiful death!	  (Come sweet death! be persuaded O beautiful death!	  (Come sweet death! be persuaded O beautiful death!
  In mercy come quickly.)	  In mercy come quickly.)	  In mercy come quickly.)	  In mercy come quickly.)
			
  From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,	  From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,	  From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,	  From the stump of the arm, the amputated hand,
  I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the matter and blood,	  I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the matter and blood,	  I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the matter and blood,	  I undo the clotted lint, remove the slough, wash off the matter and blood,
  Back on his pillow the soldier bends with curv'd neck and side falling head,	  Back on his pillow the soldier bends with curv'd neck and side falling head,	  Back on his pillow the soldier bends with curv'd neck and side falling head,	  Back on his pillow the soldier bends with curv'd neck and side falling head,
  His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on the	  His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on the	  His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on the	  His eyes are closed, his face is pale, he dares not look on the
      bloody stump,	      bloody stump,	      bloody stump,	      bloody stump,
  And has not yet look'd on it.	  And has not yet look'd on it.	  And has not yet look'd on it.	  And has not yet look'd on it.
			
  I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep,	  I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep,	  I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep,	  I dress a wound in the side, deep, deep,
  But a day or two more, for see the frame all wasted and sinking,	  But a day or two more, for see the frame all wasted and sinking,	  But a day or two more, for see the frame all wasted and sinking,	  But a day or two more, for see the frame all wasted and sinking,
  And the yellow-blue countenance see.	  And the yellow-blue countenance see.	  And the yellow-blue countenance see.	  And the yellow-blue countenance see.
			
  I dress the perforated shoulder, the foot with the bullet-wound,	  I dress the perforated shoulder, the foot with the bullet-wound,	  I dress the perforated shoulder, the foot with the bullet-wound,	  I dress the perforated shoulder, the foot with the bullet-wound,
  Cleanse the one with a gnawing and putrid gangrene, so sickening,	  Cleanse the one with a gnawing and putrid gangrene, so sickening,	  Cleanse the one with a gnawing and putrid gangrene, so sickening,	  Cleanse the one with a gnawing and putrid gangrene, so sickening,
      so offensive,	      so offensive,	      so offensive,	      so offensive,
  While the attendant stands behind aside me holding the tray and pail.	  While the attendant stands behind aside me holding the tray and pail.	  While the attendant stands behind aside me holding the tray and pail.	  While the attendant stands behind aside me holding the tray and pail.
			
  I am faithful, I do not give out,	  I am faithful, I do not give out,	  I am faithful, I do not give out,	  I am faithful, I do not give out,
  The fractur'd thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdomen,	  The fractur'd thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdomen,	  The fractur'd thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdomen,	  The fractur'd thigh, the knee, the wound in the abdomen,
  These and more I dress with impassive hand, (yet deep in my breast	  These and more I dress with impassive hand, (yet deep in my breast	  These and more I dress with impassive hand, (yet deep in my breast	  These and more I dress with impassive hand, (yet deep in my breast
      a fire, a burning flame.)	      a fire, a burning flame.)	      a fire, a burning flame.)	      a fire, a burning flame.)
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Thus in silence in dreams' projections,	  Thus in silence in dreams' projections,	  Thus in silence in dreams' projections,	  Thus in silence in dreams' projections,
  Returning, resuming, I thread my way through the hospitals,	  Returning, resuming, I thread my way through the hospitals,	  Returning, resuming, I thread my way through the hospitals,	  Returning, resuming, I thread my way through the hospitals,
  The hurt and wounded I pacify with soothing hand,	  The hurt and wounded I pacify with soothing hand,	  The hurt and wounded I pacify with soothing hand,	  The hurt and wounded I pacify with soothing hand,
  I sit by the restless all the dark night, some are so young,	  I sit by the restless all the dark night, some are so young,	  I sit by the restless all the dark night, some are so young,	  I sit by the restless all the dark night, some are so young,
  Some suffer so much, I recall the experience sweet and sad,	  Some suffer so much, I recall the experience sweet and sad,	  Some suffer so much, I recall the experience sweet and sad,	  Some suffer so much, I recall the experience sweet and sad,
  (Many a soldier's loving arms about this neck have cross'd and rested,	  (Many a soldier's loving arms about this neck have cross'd and rested,	  (Many a soldier's loving arms about this neck have cross'd and rested,	  (Many a soldier's loving arms about this neck have cross'd and rested,
  Many a soldier's kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)	  Many a soldier's kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)	  Many a soldier's kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)	  Many a soldier's kiss dwells on these bearded lips.)
			
			
			
			
Long, Too Long America	Long, Too Long America	Long, Too Long America	Long, Too Long America
			
  Long, too long America,	  Long, too long America,	  Long, too long America,	  Long, too long America,
  Traveling roads all even and peaceful you learn'd from joys and	  Traveling roads all even and peaceful you learn'd from joys and	  Traveling roads all even and peaceful you learn'd from joys and	  Traveling roads all even and peaceful you learn'd from joys and
      prosperity only,	      prosperity only,	      prosperity only,	      prosperity only,
  But now, ah now, to learn from crises of anguish, advancing,	  But now, ah now, to learn from crises of anguish, advancing,	  But now, ah now, to learn from crises of anguish, advancing,	  But now, ah now, to learn from crises of anguish, advancing,
      grappling with direst fate and recoiling not,	      grappling with direst fate and recoiling not,	      grappling with direst fate and recoiling not,	      grappling with direst fate and recoiling not,
  And now to conceive and show to the world what your children	  And now to conceive and show to the world what your children	  And now to conceive and show to the world what your children	  And now to conceive and show to the world what your children
      en-masse really are,	      en-masse really are,	      en-masse really are,	      en-masse really are,
  (For who except myself has yet conceiv'd what your children en-masse	  (For who except myself has yet conceiv'd what your children en-masse	  (For who except myself has yet conceiv'd what your children en-masse	  (For who except myself has yet conceiv'd what your children en-masse
      really are?)	      really are?)	      really are?)	      really are?)
			
			
			
			
Give Me the Splendid Silent Sun	Give Me the Splendid Silent Sun	Give Me the Splendid Silent Sun	Give Me the Splendid Silent Sun
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Give me the splendid silent sun with all his beams full-dazzling,	  Give me the splendid silent sun with all his beams full-dazzling,	  Give me the splendid silent sun with all his beams full-dazzling,	  Give me the splendid silent sun with all his beams full-dazzling,
  Give me autumnal fruit ripe and red from the orchard,	  Give me autumnal fruit ripe and red from the orchard,	  Give me autumnal fruit ripe and red from the orchard,	  Give me autumnal fruit ripe and red from the orchard,
  Give me a field where the unmow'd grass grows,	  Give me a field where the unmow'd grass grows,	  Give me a field where the unmow'd grass grows,	  Give me a field where the unmow'd grass grows,
  Give me an arbor, give me the trellis'd grape,	  Give me an arbor, give me the trellis'd grape,	  Give me an arbor, give me the trellis'd grape,	  Give me an arbor, give me the trellis'd grape,
  Give me fresh corn and wheat, give me serene-moving animals teaching	  Give me fresh corn and wheat, give me serene-moving animals teaching	  Give me fresh corn and wheat, give me serene-moving animals teaching	  Give me fresh corn and wheat, give me serene-moving animals teaching
      content,	      content,	      content,	      content,
  Give me nights perfectly quiet as on high plateaus west of the	  Give me nights perfectly quiet as on high plateaus west of the	  Give me nights perfectly quiet as on high plateaus west of the	  Give me nights perfectly quiet as on high plateaus west of the
      Mississippi, and I looking up at the stars,	      Mississippi, and I looking up at the stars,	      Mississippi, and I looking up at the stars,	      Mississippi, and I looking up at the stars,
  Give me odorous at sunrise a garden of beautiful flowers where I can	  Give me odorous at sunrise a garden of beautiful flowers where I can	  Give me odorous at sunrise a garden of beautiful flowers where I can	  Give me odorous at sunrise a garden of beautiful flowers where I can
      walk undisturb'd,	      walk undisturb'd,	      walk undisturb'd,	      walk undisturb'd,
  Give me for marriage a sweet-breath'd woman of whom I should never tire,	  Give me for marriage a sweet-breath'd woman of whom I should never tire,	  Give me for marriage a sweet-breath'd woman of whom I should never tire,	  Give me for marriage a sweet-breath'd woman of whom I should never tire,
  Give me a perfect child, give me away aside from the noise of the	  Give me a perfect child, give me away aside from the noise of the	  Give me a perfect child, give me away aside from the noise of the	  Give me a perfect child, give me away aside from the noise of the
      world a rural domestic life,	      world a rural domestic life,	      world a rural domestic life,	      world a rural domestic life,
  Give me to warble spontaneous songs recluse by myself, for my own ears only,	  Give me to warble spontaneous songs recluse by myself, for my own ears only,	  Give me to warble spontaneous songs recluse by myself, for my own ears only,	  Give me to warble spontaneous songs recluse by myself, for my own ears only,
  Give me solitude, give me Nature, give me again O Nature your primal	  Give me solitude, give me Nature, give me again O Nature your primal	  Give me solitude, give me Nature, give me again O Nature your primal	  Give me solitude, give me Nature, give me again O Nature your primal
      sanities!	      sanities!	      sanities!	      sanities!
			
  These demanding to have them, (tired with ceaseless excitement, and	  These demanding to have them, (tired with ceaseless excitement, and	  These demanding to have them, (tired with ceaseless excitement, and	  These demanding to have them, (tired with ceaseless excitement, and
      rack'd by the war-strife,)	      rack'd by the war-strife,)	      rack'd by the war-strife,)	      rack'd by the war-strife,)
  These to procure incessantly asking, rising in cries from my heart,	  These to procure incessantly asking, rising in cries from my heart,	  These to procure incessantly asking, rising in cries from my heart,	  These to procure incessantly asking, rising in cries from my heart,
  While yet incessantly asking still I adhere to my city,	  While yet incessantly asking still I adhere to my city,	  While yet incessantly asking still I adhere to my city,	  While yet incessantly asking still I adhere to my city,
  Day upon day and year upon year O city, walking your streets,	  Day upon day and year upon year O city, walking your streets,	  Day upon day and year upon year O city, walking your streets,	  Day upon day and year upon year O city, walking your streets,
  Where you hold me enchain'd a certain time refusing to give me up,	  Where you hold me enchain'd a certain time refusing to give me up,	  Where you hold me enchain'd a certain time refusing to give me up,	  Where you hold me enchain'd a certain time refusing to give me up,
  Yet giving to make me glutted, enrich'd of soul, you give me forever faces;	  Yet giving to make me glutted, enrich'd of soul, you give me forever faces;	  Yet giving to make me glutted, enrich'd of soul, you give me forever faces;	  Yet giving to make me glutted, enrich'd of soul, you give me forever faces;
  (O I see what I sought to escape, confronting, reversing my cries,	  (O I see what I sought to escape, confronting, reversing my cries,	  (O I see what I sought to escape, confronting, reversing my cries,	  (O I see what I sought to escape, confronting, reversing my cries,
  see my own soul trampling down what it ask'd for.)	  see my own soul trampling down what it ask'd for.)	  see my own soul trampling down what it ask'd for.)	  see my own soul trampling down what it ask'd for.)
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Keep your splendid silent sun,	  Keep your splendid silent sun,	  Keep your splendid silent sun,	  Keep your splendid silent sun,
  Keep your woods O Nature, and the quiet places by the woods,	  Keep your woods O Nature, and the quiet places by the woods,	  Keep your woods O Nature, and the quiet places by the woods,	  Keep your woods O Nature, and the quiet places by the woods,
  Keep your fields of clover and timothy, and your corn-fields and orchards,	  Keep your fields of clover and timothy, and your corn-fields and orchards,	  Keep your fields of clover and timothy, and your corn-fields and orchards,	  Keep your fields of clover and timothy, and your corn-fields and orchards,
  Keep the blossoming buckwheat fields where the Ninth-month bees hum;	  Keep the blossoming buckwheat fields where the Ninth-month bees hum;	  Keep the blossoming buckwheat fields where the Ninth-month bees hum;	  Keep the blossoming buckwheat fields where the Ninth-month bees hum;
  Give me faces and streets--give me these phantoms incessant and	  Give me faces and streets--give me these phantoms incessant and	  Give me faces and streets--give me these phantoms incessant and	  Give me faces and streets--give me these phantoms incessant and
      endless along the trottoirs!	      endless along the trottoirs!	      endless along the trottoirs!	      endless along the trottoirs!
  Give me interminable eyes--give me women--give me comrades and	  Give me interminable eyes--give me women--give me comrades and	  Give me interminable eyes--give me women--give me comrades and	  Give me interminable eyes--give me women--give me comrades and
      lovers by the thousand!	      lovers by the thousand!	      lovers by the thousand!	      lovers by the thousand!
  Let me see new ones every day--let me hold new ones by the hand every day!	  Let me see new ones every day--let me hold new ones by the hand every day!	  Let me see new ones every day--let me hold new ones by the hand every day!	  Let me see new ones every day--let me hold new ones by the hand every day!
  Give me such shows--give me the streets of Manhattan!	  Give me such shows--give me the streets of Manhattan!	  Give me such shows--give me the streets of Manhattan!	  Give me such shows--give me the streets of Manhattan!
  Give me Broadway, with the soldiers marching--give me the sound of	  Give me Broadway, with the soldiers marching--give me the sound of	  Give me Broadway, with the soldiers marching--give me the sound of	  Give me Broadway, with the soldiers marching--give me the sound of
      the trumpets and drums!	      the trumpets and drums!	      the trumpets and drums!	      the trumpets and drums!
  (The soldiers in companies or regiments--some starting away, flush'd	  (The soldiers in companies or regiments--some starting away, flush'd	  (The soldiers in companies or regiments--some starting away, flush'd	  (The soldiers in companies or regiments--some starting away, flush'd
      and reckless,	      and reckless,	      and reckless,	      and reckless,
  Some, their time up, returning with thinn'd ranks, young, yet very	  Some, their time up, returning with thinn'd ranks, young, yet very	  Some, their time up, returning with thinn'd ranks, young, yet very	  Some, their time up, returning with thinn'd ranks, young, yet very
      old, worn, marching, noticing nothing;)	      old, worn, marching, noticing nothing;)	      old, worn, marching, noticing nothing;)	      old, worn, marching, noticing nothing;)
  Give me the shores and wharves heavy-fringed with black ships!	  Give me the shores and wharves heavy-fringed with black ships!	  Give me the shores and wharves heavy-fringed with black ships!	  Give me the shores and wharves heavy-fringed with black ships!
  O such for me! O an intense life, full to repletion and varied!	  O such for me! O an intense life, full to repletion and varied!	  O such for me! O an intense life, full to repletion and varied!	  O such for me! O an intense life, full to repletion and varied!
  The life of the theatre, bar-room, huge hotel, for me!	  The life of the theatre, bar-room, huge hotel, for me!	  The life of the theatre, bar-room, huge hotel, for me!	  The life of the theatre, bar-room, huge hotel, for me!
  The saloon of the steamer! the crowded excursion for me! the	  The saloon of the steamer! the crowded excursion for me! the	  The saloon of the steamer! the crowded excursion for me! the	  The saloon of the steamer! the crowded excursion for me! the
      torchlight procession!	      torchlight procession!	      torchlight procession!	      torchlight procession!
  The dense brigade bound for the war, with high piled military wagons	  The dense brigade bound for the war, with high piled military wagons	  The dense brigade bound for the war, with high piled military wagons	  The dense brigade bound for the war, with high piled military wagons
      following;	      following;	      following;	      following;
  People, endless, streaming, with strong voices, passions, pageants,	  People, endless, streaming, with strong voices, passions, pageants,	  People, endless, streaming, with strong voices, passions, pageants,	  People, endless, streaming, with strong voices, passions, pageants,
  Manhattan streets with their powerful throbs, with beating drums as now,	  Manhattan streets with their powerful throbs, with beating drums as now,	  Manhattan streets with their powerful throbs, with beating drums as now,	  Manhattan streets with their powerful throbs, with beating drums as now,
  The endless and noisy chorus, the rustle and clank of muskets, (even	  The endless and noisy chorus, the rustle and clank of muskets, (even	  The endless and noisy chorus, the rustle and clank of muskets, (even	  The endless and noisy chorus, the rustle and clank of muskets, (even
      the sight of the wounded,)	      the sight of the wounded,)	      the sight of the wounded,)	      the sight of the wounded,)
  Manhattan crowds, with their turbulent musical chorus!	  Manhattan crowds, with their turbulent musical chorus!	  Manhattan crowds, with their turbulent musical chorus!	  Manhattan crowds, with their turbulent musical chorus!
  Manhattan faces and eyes forever for me.	  Manhattan faces and eyes forever for me.	  Manhattan faces and eyes forever for me.	  Manhattan faces and eyes forever for me.
			
			
			
			
Dirge for Two Veterans	Dirge for Two Veterans	Dirge for Two Veterans	Dirge for Two Veterans
			
       The last sunbeam	       The last sunbeam	       The last sunbeam	       The last sunbeam
  Lightly falls from the finish'd Sabbath,	  Lightly falls from the finish'd Sabbath,	  Lightly falls from the finish'd Sabbath,	  Lightly falls from the finish'd Sabbath,
  On the pavement here, and there beyond it is looking,	  On the pavement here, and there beyond it is looking,	  On the pavement here, and there beyond it is looking,	  On the pavement here, and there beyond it is looking,
       Down a new-made double grave.	       Down a new-made double grave.	       Down a new-made double grave.	       Down a new-made double grave.
			
       Lo, the moon ascending,	       Lo, the moon ascending,	       Lo, the moon ascending,	       Lo, the moon ascending,
  Up from the east the silvery round moon,	  Up from the east the silvery round moon,	  Up from the east the silvery round moon,	  Up from the east the silvery round moon,
  Beautiful over the house-tops, ghastly, phantom moon,	  Beautiful over the house-tops, ghastly, phantom moon,	  Beautiful over the house-tops, ghastly, phantom moon,	  Beautiful over the house-tops, ghastly, phantom moon,
       Immense and silent moon.	       Immense and silent moon.	       Immense and silent moon.	       Immense and silent moon.
			
       I see a sad procession,	       I see a sad procession,	       I see a sad procession,	       I see a sad procession,
  And I hear the sound of coming full-key'd bugles,	  And I hear the sound of coming full-key'd bugles,	  And I hear the sound of coming full-key'd bugles,	  And I hear the sound of coming full-key'd bugles,
  All the channels of the city streets they're flooding,	  All the channels of the city streets they're flooding,	  All the channels of the city streets they're flooding,	  All the channels of the city streets they're flooding,
       As with voices and with tears.	       As with voices and with tears.	       As with voices and with tears.	       As with voices and with tears.
			
       I hear the great drums pounding,	       I hear the great drums pounding,	       I hear the great drums pounding,	       I hear the great drums pounding,
  And the small drums steady whirring,	  And the small drums steady whirring,	  And the small drums steady whirring,	  And the small drums steady whirring,
  And every blow of the great convulsive drums,	  And every blow of the great convulsive drums,	  And every blow of the great convulsive drums,	  And every blow of the great convulsive drums,
       Strikes me through and through.	       Strikes me through and through.	       Strikes me through and through.	       Strikes me through and through.
			
       For the son is brought with the father,	       For the son is brought with the father,	       For the son is brought with the father,	       For the son is brought with the father,
  (In the foremost ranks of the fierce assault they fell,	  (In the foremost ranks of the fierce assault they fell,	  (In the foremost ranks of the fierce assault they fell,	  (In the foremost ranks of the fierce assault they fell,
  Two veterans son and father dropt together,	  Two veterans son and father dropt together,	  Two veterans son and father dropt together,	  Two veterans son and father dropt together,
       And the double grave awaits them.)	       And the double grave awaits them.)	       And the double grave awaits them.)	       And the double grave awaits them.)
			
       Now nearer blow the bugles,	       Now nearer blow the bugles,	       Now nearer blow the bugles,	       Now nearer blow the bugles,
  And the drums strike more convulsive,	  And the drums strike more convulsive,	  And the drums strike more convulsive,	  And the drums strike more convulsive,
  And the daylight o'er the pavement quite has faded,	  And the daylight o'er the pavement quite has faded,	  And the daylight o'er the pavement quite has faded,	  And the daylight o'er the pavement quite has faded,
       And the strong dead-march enwraps me.	       And the strong dead-march enwraps me.	       And the strong dead-march enwraps me.	       And the strong dead-march enwraps me.
			
       In the eastern sky up-buoying,	       In the eastern sky up-buoying,	       In the eastern sky up-buoying,	       In the eastern sky up-buoying,
  The sorrowful vast phantom moves illumin'd,	  The sorrowful vast phantom moves illumin'd,	  The sorrowful vast phantom moves illumin'd,	  The sorrowful vast phantom moves illumin'd,
  ('Tis some mother's large transparent face,	  ('Tis some mother's large transparent face,	  ('Tis some mother's large transparent face,	  ('Tis some mother's large transparent face,
       In heaven brighter growing.)	       In heaven brighter growing.)	       In heaven brighter growing.)	       In heaven brighter growing.)
			
       O strong dead-march you please me!	       O strong dead-march you please me!	       O strong dead-march you please me!	       O strong dead-march you please me!
  O moon immense with your silvery face you soothe me!	  O moon immense with your silvery face you soothe me!	  O moon immense with your silvery face you soothe me!	  O moon immense with your silvery face you soothe me!
  O my soldiers twain! O my veterans passing to burial!	  O my soldiers twain! O my veterans passing to burial!	  O my soldiers twain! O my veterans passing to burial!	  O my soldiers twain! O my veterans passing to burial!
       What I have I also give you.	       What I have I also give you.	       What I have I also give you.	       What I have I also give you.
			
       The moon gives you light,	       The moon gives you light,	       The moon gives you light,	       The moon gives you light,
  And the bugles and the drums give you music,	  And the bugles and the drums give you music,	  And the bugles and the drums give you music,	  And the bugles and the drums give you music,
  And my heart, O my soldiers, my veterans,	  And my heart, O my soldiers, my veterans,	  And my heart, O my soldiers, my veterans,	  And my heart, O my soldiers, my veterans,
       My heart gives you love.	       My heart gives you love.	       My heart gives you love.	       My heart gives you love.
			
			
			
			
Over the Carnage Rose Prophetic a Voice	Over the Carnage Rose Prophetic a Voice	Over the Carnage Rose Prophetic a Voice	Over the Carnage Rose Prophetic a Voice
			
  Over the carnage rose prophetic a voice,	  Over the carnage rose prophetic a voice,	  Over the carnage rose prophetic a voice,	  Over the carnage rose prophetic a voice,
  Be not dishearten'd, affection shall solve the problems of freedom yet,	  Be not dishearten'd, affection shall solve the problems of freedom yet,	  Be not dishearten'd, affection shall solve the problems of freedom yet,	  Be not dishearten'd, affection shall solve the problems of freedom yet,
  Those who love each other shall become invincible,	  Those who love each other shall become invincible,	  Those who love each other shall become invincible,	  Those who love each other shall become invincible,
  They shall yet make Columbia victorious.	  They shall yet make Columbia victorious.	  They shall yet make Columbia victorious.	  They shall yet make Columbia victorious.
			
  Sons of the Mother of All, you shall yet be victorious,	  Sons of the Mother of All, you shall yet be victorious,	  Sons of the Mother of All, you shall yet be victorious,	  Sons of the Mother of All, you shall yet be victorious,
  You shall yet laugh to scorn the attacks of all the remainder of the earth.	  You shall yet laugh to scorn the attacks of all the remainder of the earth.	  You shall yet laugh to scorn the attacks of all the remainder of the earth.	  You shall yet laugh to scorn the attacks of all the remainder of the earth.
			
  No danger shall balk Columbia's lovers,	  No danger shall balk Columbia's lovers,	  No danger shall balk Columbia's lovers,	  No danger shall balk Columbia's lovers,
  If need be a thousand shall sternly immolate themselves for one.	  If need be a thousand shall sternly immolate themselves for one.	  If need be a thousand shall sternly immolate themselves for one.	  If need be a thousand shall sternly immolate themselves for one.
			
  One from Massachusetts shall be a Missourian's comrade,	  One from Massachusetts shall be a Missourian's comrade,	  One from Massachusetts shall be a Missourian's comrade,	  One from Massachusetts shall be a Missourian's comrade,
  From Maine and from hot Carolina, and another an Oregonese, shall	  From Maine and from hot Carolina, and another an Oregonese, shall	  From Maine and from hot Carolina, and another an Oregonese, shall	  From Maine and from hot Carolina, and another an Oregonese, shall
      be friends triune,	      be friends triune,	      be friends triune,	      be friends triune,
  More precious to each other than all the riches of the earth.	  More precious to each other than all the riches of the earth.	  More precious to each other than all the riches of the earth.	  More precious to each other than all the riches of the earth.
			
  To Michigan, Florida perfumes shall tenderly come,	  To Michigan, Florida perfumes shall tenderly come,	  To Michigan, Florida perfumes shall tenderly come,	  To Michigan, Florida perfumes shall tenderly come,
  Not the perfumes of flowers, but sweeter, and wafted beyond death.	  Not the perfumes of flowers, but sweeter, and wafted beyond death.	  Not the perfumes of flowers, but sweeter, and wafted beyond death.	  Not the perfumes of flowers, but sweeter, and wafted beyond death.
			
  It shall be customary in the houses and streets to see manly affection,	  It shall be customary in the houses and streets to see manly affection,	  It shall be customary in the houses and streets to see manly affection,	  It shall be customary in the houses and streets to see manly affection,
  The most dauntless and rude shall touch face to face lightly,	  The most dauntless and rude shall touch face to face lightly,	  The most dauntless and rude shall touch face to face lightly,	  The most dauntless and rude shall touch face to face lightly,
  The dependence of Liberty shall be lovers,	  The dependence of Liberty shall be lovers,	  The dependence of Liberty shall be lovers,	  The dependence of Liberty shall be lovers,
  The continuance of Equality shall be comrades.	  The continuance of Equality shall be comrades.	  The continuance of Equality shall be comrades.	  The continuance of Equality shall be comrades.
			
  These shall tie you and band you stronger than hoops of iron,	  These shall tie you and band you stronger than hoops of iron,	  These shall tie you and band you stronger than hoops of iron,	  These shall tie you and band you stronger than hoops of iron,
  I, ecstatic, O partners! O lands! with the love of lovers tie you.	  I, ecstatic, O partners! O lands! with the love of lovers tie you.	  I, ecstatic, O partners! O lands! with the love of lovers tie you.	  I, ecstatic, O partners! O lands! with the love of lovers tie you.
			
  (Were you looking to be held together by lawyers?	  (Were you looking to be held together by lawyers?	  (Were you looking to be held together by lawyers?	  (Were you looking to be held together by lawyers?
  Or by an agreement on a paper? or by arms?	  Or by an agreement on a paper? or by arms?	  Or by an agreement on a paper? or by arms?	  Or by an agreement on a paper? or by arms?
  Nay, nor the world, nor any living thing, will so cohere.)	  Nay, nor the world, nor any living thing, will so cohere.)	  Nay, nor the world, nor any living thing, will so cohere.)	  Nay, nor the world, nor any living thing, will so cohere.)
			
			
			
			
I Saw Old General at Bay	I Saw Old General at Bay	I Saw Old General at Bay	I Saw Old General at Bay
			
  I saw old General at bay,	  I saw old General at bay,	  I saw old General at bay,	  I saw old General at bay,
  (Old as he was, his gray eyes yet shone out in battle like stars,)	  (Old as he was, his gray eyes yet shone out in battle like stars,)	  (Old as he was, his gray eyes yet shone out in battle like stars,)	  (Old as he was, his gray eyes yet shone out in battle like stars,)
  His small force was now completely hemm'd in, in his works,	  His small force was now completely hemm'd in, in his works,	  His small force was now completely hemm'd in, in his works,	  His small force was now completely hemm'd in, in his works,
  He call'd for volunteers to run the enemy's lines, a desperate emergency,	  He call'd for volunteers to run the enemy's lines, a desperate emergency,	  He call'd for volunteers to run the enemy's lines, a desperate emergency,	  He call'd for volunteers to run the enemy's lines, a desperate emergency,
  I saw a hundred and more step forth from the ranks, but two or three	  I saw a hundred and more step forth from the ranks, but two or three	  I saw a hundred and more step forth from the ranks, but two or three	  I saw a hundred and more step forth from the ranks, but two or three
      were selected,	      were selected,	      were selected,	      were selected,
  I saw them receive their orders aside, they listen'd with care, the	  I saw them receive their orders aside, they listen'd with care, the	  I saw them receive their orders aside, they listen'd with care, the	  I saw them receive their orders aside, they listen'd with care, the
      adjutant was very grave,	      adjutant was very grave,	      adjutant was very grave,	      adjutant was very grave,
  I saw them depart with cheerfulness, freely risking their lives.	  I saw them depart with cheerfulness, freely risking their lives.	  I saw them depart with cheerfulness, freely risking their lives.	  I saw them depart with cheerfulness, freely risking their lives.
			
			
			
			
The Artilleryman's Vision	The Artilleryman's Vision	The Artilleryman's Vision	The Artilleryman's Vision
			
  While my wife at my side lies slumbering, and the wars are over long,	  While my wife at my side lies slumbering, and the wars are over long,	  While my wife at my side lies slumbering, and the wars are over long,	  While my wife at my side lies slumbering, and the wars are over long,
  And my head on the pillow rests at home, and the vacant midnight passes,	  And my head on the pillow rests at home, and the vacant midnight passes,	  And my head on the pillow rests at home, and the vacant midnight passes,	  And my head on the pillow rests at home, and the vacant midnight passes,
  And through the stillness, through the dark, I hear, just hear, the	  And through the stillness, through the dark, I hear, just hear, the	  And through the stillness, through the dark, I hear, just hear, the	  And through the stillness, through the dark, I hear, just hear, the
      breath of my infant,	      breath of my infant,	      breath of my infant,	      breath of my infant,
  There in the room as I wake from sleep this vision presses upon me;	  There in the room as I wake from sleep this vision presses upon me;	  There in the room as I wake from sleep this vision presses upon me;	  There in the room as I wake from sleep this vision presses upon me;
  The engagement opens there and then in fantasy unreal,	  The engagement opens there and then in fantasy unreal,	  The engagement opens there and then in fantasy unreal,	  The engagement opens there and then in fantasy unreal,
  The skirmishers begin, they crawl cautiously ahead, I hear the	  The skirmishers begin, they crawl cautiously ahead, I hear the	  The skirmishers begin, they crawl cautiously ahead, I hear the	  The skirmishers begin, they crawl cautiously ahead, I hear the
      irregular snap! snap!	      irregular snap! snap!	      irregular snap! snap!	      irregular snap! snap!
  I hear the sounds of the different missiles, the short t-h-t! t-h-t!	  I hear the sounds of the different missiles, the short t-h-t! t-h-t!	  I hear the sounds of the different missiles, the short t-h-t! t-h-t!	  I hear the sounds of the different missiles, the short t-h-t! t-h-t!
      of the rifle-balls,	      of the rifle-balls,	      of the rifle-balls,	      of the rifle-balls,
  I see the shells exploding leaving small white clouds, I hear the	  I see the shells exploding leaving small white clouds, I hear the	  I see the shells exploding leaving small white clouds, I hear the	  I see the shells exploding leaving small white clouds, I hear the
      great shells shrieking as they pass,	      great shells shrieking as they pass,	      great shells shrieking as they pass,	      great shells shrieking as they pass,
  The grape like the hum and whirr of wind through the trees,	  The grape like the hum and whirr of wind through the trees,	  The grape like the hum and whirr of wind through the trees,	  The grape like the hum and whirr of wind through the trees,
      (tumultuous now the contest rages,)	      (tumultuous now the contest rages,)	      (tumultuous now the contest rages,)	      (tumultuous now the contest rages,)
  All the scenes at the batteries rise in detail before me again,	  All the scenes at the batteries rise in detail before me again,	  All the scenes at the batteries rise in detail before me again,	  All the scenes at the batteries rise in detail before me again,
  The crashing and smoking, the pride of the men in their pieces,	  The crashing and smoking, the pride of the men in their pieces,	  The crashing and smoking, the pride of the men in their pieces,	  The crashing and smoking, the pride of the men in their pieces,
  The chief-gunner ranges and sights his piece and selects a fuse of	  The chief-gunner ranges and sights his piece and selects a fuse of	  The chief-gunner ranges and sights his piece and selects a fuse of	  The chief-gunner ranges and sights his piece and selects a fuse of
      the right time,	      the right time,	      the right time,	      the right time,
  After firing I see him lean aside and look eagerly off to note the effect;	  After firing I see him lean aside and look eagerly off to note the effect;	  After firing I see him lean aside and look eagerly off to note the effect;	  After firing I see him lean aside and look eagerly off to note the effect;
  Elsewhere I hear the cry of a regiment charging, (the young colonel	  Elsewhere I hear the cry of a regiment charging, (the young colonel	  Elsewhere I hear the cry of a regiment charging, (the young colonel	  Elsewhere I hear the cry of a regiment charging, (the young colonel
      leads himself this time with brandish'd sword,)	      leads himself this time with brandish'd sword,)	      leads himself this time with brandish'd sword,)	      leads himself this time with brandish'd sword,)
  I see the gaps cut by the enemy's volleys, (quickly fill'd up, no delay,)	  I see the gaps cut by the enemy's volleys, (quickly fill'd up, no delay,)	  I see the gaps cut by the enemy's volleys, (quickly fill'd up, no delay,)	  I see the gaps cut by the enemy's volleys, (quickly fill'd up, no delay,)
  I breathe the suffocating smoke, then the flat clouds hover low	  I breathe the suffocating smoke, then the flat clouds hover low	  I breathe the suffocating smoke, then the flat clouds hover low	  I breathe the suffocating smoke, then the flat clouds hover low
      concealing all;	      concealing all;	      concealing all;	      concealing all;
  Now a strange lull for a few seconds, not a shot fired on either side,	  Now a strange lull for a few seconds, not a shot fired on either side,	  Now a strange lull for a few seconds, not a shot fired on either side,	  Now a strange lull for a few seconds, not a shot fired on either side,
  Then resumed the chaos louder than ever, with eager calls and	  Then resumed the chaos louder than ever, with eager calls and	  Then resumed the chaos louder than ever, with eager calls and	  Then resumed the chaos louder than ever, with eager calls and
      orders of officers,	      orders of officers,	      orders of officers,	      orders of officers,
  While from some distant part of the field the wind wafts to my ears	  While from some distant part of the field the wind wafts to my ears	  While from some distant part of the field the wind wafts to my ears	  While from some distant part of the field the wind wafts to my ears
      a shout of applause, (some special success,)	      a shout of applause, (some special success,)	      a shout of applause, (some special success,)	      a shout of applause, (some special success,)
  And ever the sound of the cannon far or near, (rousing even in	  And ever the sound of the cannon far or near, (rousing even in	  And ever the sound of the cannon far or near, (rousing even in	  And ever the sound of the cannon far or near, (rousing even in
      dreams a devilish exultation and all the old mad joy in the	      dreams a devilish exultation and all the old mad joy in the	      dreams a devilish exultation and all the old mad joy in the	      dreams a devilish exultation and all the old mad joy in the
      depths of my soul,)	      depths of my soul,)	      depths of my soul,)	      depths of my soul,)
  And ever the hastening of infantry shifting positions, batteries,	  And ever the hastening of infantry shifting positions, batteries,	  And ever the hastening of infantry shifting positions, batteries,	  And ever the hastening of infantry shifting positions, batteries,
      cavalry, moving hither and thither,	      cavalry, moving hither and thither,	      cavalry, moving hither and thither,	      cavalry, moving hither and thither,
  (The falling, dying, I heed not, the wounded dripping and red	  (The falling, dying, I heed not, the wounded dripping and red	  (The falling, dying, I heed not, the wounded dripping and red	  (The falling, dying, I heed not, the wounded dripping and red
      heed not, some to the rear are hobbling,)	      heed not, some to the rear are hobbling,)	      heed not, some to the rear are hobbling,)	      heed not, some to the rear are hobbling,)
  Grime, heat, rush, aide-de-camps galloping by or on a full run,	  Grime, heat, rush, aide-de-camps galloping by or on a full run,	  Grime, heat, rush, aide-de-camps galloping by or on a full run,	  Grime, heat, rush, aide-de-camps galloping by or on a full run,
  With the patter of small arms, the warning s-s-t of the rifles,	  With the patter of small arms, the warning s-s-t of the rifles,	  With the patter of small arms, the warning s-s-t of the rifles,	  With the patter of small arms, the warning s-s-t of the rifles,
      (these in my vision I hear or see,)	      (these in my vision I hear or see,)	      (these in my vision I hear or see,)	      (these in my vision I hear or see,)
  And bombs bursting in air, and at night the vari-color'd rockets.	  And bombs bursting in air, and at night the vari-color'd rockets.	  And bombs bursting in air, and at night the vari-color'd rockets.	  And bombs bursting in air, and at night the vari-color'd rockets.
			
			
			
			
Ethiopia Saluting the Colors	Ethiopia Saluting the Colors	Ethiopia Saluting the Colors	Ethiopia Saluting the Colors
			
  Who are you dusky woman, so ancient hardly human,	  Who are you dusky woman, so ancient hardly human,	  Who are you dusky woman, so ancient hardly human,	  Who are you dusky woman, so ancient hardly human,
  With your woolly-white and turban'd head, and bare bony feet?	  With your woolly-white and turban'd head, and bare bony feet?	  With your woolly-white and turban'd head, and bare bony feet?	  With your woolly-white and turban'd head, and bare bony feet?
  Why rising by the roadside here, do you the colors greet?	  Why rising by the roadside here, do you the colors greet?	  Why rising by the roadside here, do you the colors greet?	  Why rising by the roadside here, do you the colors greet?
			
  ('Tis while our army lines Carolina's sands and pines,	  ('Tis while our army lines Carolina's sands and pines,	  ('Tis while our army lines Carolina's sands and pines,	  ('Tis while our army lines Carolina's sands and pines,
  Forth from thy hovel door thou Ethiopia com'st to me,	  Forth from thy hovel door thou Ethiopia com'st to me,	  Forth from thy hovel door thou Ethiopia com'st to me,	  Forth from thy hovel door thou Ethiopia com'st to me,
  As under doughty Sherman I march toward the sea.)	  As under doughty Sherman I march toward the sea.)	  As under doughty Sherman I march toward the sea.)	  As under doughty Sherman I march toward the sea.)
			
  Me master years a hundred since from my parents sunder'd,	  Me master years a hundred since from my parents sunder'd,	  Me master years a hundred since from my parents sunder'd,	  Me master years a hundred since from my parents sunder'd,
  A little child, they caught me as the savage beast is caught,	  A little child, they caught me as the savage beast is caught,	  A little child, they caught me as the savage beast is caught,	  A little child, they caught me as the savage beast is caught,
  Then hither me across the sea the cruel slaver brought.	  Then hither me across the sea the cruel slaver brought.	  Then hither me across the sea the cruel slaver brought.	  Then hither me across the sea the cruel slaver brought.
			
  No further does she say, but lingering all the day,	  No further does she say, but lingering all the day,	  No further does she say, but lingering all the day,	  No further does she say, but lingering all the day,
  Her high-borne turban'd head she wags, and rolls her darkling eye,	  Her high-borne turban'd head she wags, and rolls her darkling eye,	  Her high-borne turban'd head she wags, and rolls her darkling eye,	  Her high-borne turban'd head she wags, and rolls her darkling eye,
  And courtesies to the regiments, the guidons moving by.	  And courtesies to the regiments, the guidons moving by.	  And courtesies to the regiments, the guidons moving by.	  And courtesies to the regiments, the guidons moving by.
			
  What is it fateful woman, so blear, hardly human?	  What is it fateful woman, so blear, hardly human?	  What is it fateful woman, so blear, hardly human?	  What is it fateful woman, so blear, hardly human?
  Why wag your head with turban bound, yellow, red and green?	  Why wag your head with turban bound, yellow, red and green?	  Why wag your head with turban bound, yellow, red and green?	  Why wag your head with turban bound, yellow, red and green?
  Are the things so strange and marvelous you see or have seen?	  Are the things so strange and marvelous you see or have seen?	  Are the things so strange and marvelous you see or have seen?	  Are the things so strange and marvelous you see or have seen?
			
			
			
			
Not Youth Pertains to Me	Not Youth Pertains to Me	Not Youth Pertains to Me	Not Youth Pertains to Me
			
  Not youth pertains to me,	  Not youth pertains to me,	  Not youth pertains to me,	  Not youth pertains to me,
  Nor delicatesse, I cannot beguile the time with talk,	  Nor delicatesse, I cannot beguile the time with talk,	  Nor delicatesse, I cannot beguile the time with talk,	  Nor delicatesse, I cannot beguile the time with talk,
  Awkward in the parlor, neither a dancer nor elegant,	  Awkward in the parlor, neither a dancer nor elegant,	  Awkward in the parlor, neither a dancer nor elegant,	  Awkward in the parlor, neither a dancer nor elegant,
  In the learn'd coterie sitting constrain'd and still, for learning	  In the learn'd coterie sitting constrain'd and still, for learning	  In the learn'd coterie sitting constrain'd and still, for learning	  In the learn'd coterie sitting constrain'd and still, for learning
      inures not to me,	      inures not to me,	      inures not to me,	      inures not to me,
  Beauty, knowledge, inure not to me--yet there are two or three things	  Beauty, knowledge, inure not to me--yet there are two or three things	  Beauty, knowledge, inure not to me--yet there are two or three things	  Beauty, knowledge, inure not to me--yet there are two or three things
      inure to me,	      inure to me,	      inure to me,	      inure to me,
  I have nourish'd the wounded and sooth'd many a dying soldier,	  I have nourish'd the wounded and sooth'd many a dying soldier,	  I have nourish'd the wounded and sooth'd many a dying soldier,	  I have nourish'd the wounded and sooth'd many a dying soldier,
  And at intervals waiting or in the midst of camp,	  And at intervals waiting or in the midst of camp,	  And at intervals waiting or in the midst of camp,	  And at intervals waiting or in the midst of camp,
  Composed these songs.	  Composed these songs.	  Composed these songs.	  Composed these songs.
			
			
			
			
Race of Veterans	Race of Veterans	Race of Veterans	Race of Veterans
			
  Race of veterans--race of victors!	  Race of veterans--race of victors!	  Race of veterans--race of victors!	  Race of veterans--race of victors!
  Race of the soil, ready for conflict--race of the conquering march!	  Race of the soil, ready for conflict--race of the conquering march!	  Race of the soil, ready for conflict--race of the conquering march!	  Race of the soil, ready for conflict--race of the conquering march!
  (No more credulity's race, abiding-temper'd race,)	  (No more credulity's race, abiding-temper'd race,)	  (No more credulity's race, abiding-temper'd race,)	  (No more credulity's race, abiding-temper'd race,)
  Race henceforth owning no law but the law of itself,	  Race henceforth owning no law but the law of itself,	  Race henceforth owning no law but the law of itself,	  Race henceforth owning no law but the law of itself,
  Race of passion and the storm.	  Race of passion and the storm.	  Race of passion and the storm.	  Race of passion and the storm.
			
			
			
			
World Take Good Notice	World Take Good Notice	World Take Good Notice	World Take Good Notice
			
  World take good notice, silver stars fading,	  World take good notice, silver stars fading,	  World take good notice, silver stars fading,	  World take good notice, silver stars fading,
  Milky hue ript, wet of white detaching,	  Milky hue ript, wet of white detaching,	  Milky hue ript, wet of white detaching,	  Milky hue ript, wet of white detaching,
  Coals thirty-eight, baleful and burning,	  Coals thirty-eight, baleful and burning,	  Coals thirty-eight, baleful and burning,	  Coals thirty-eight, baleful and burning,
  Scarlet, significant, hands off warning,	  Scarlet, significant, hands off warning,	  Scarlet, significant, hands off warning,	  Scarlet, significant, hands off warning,
  Now and henceforth flaunt from these shores.	  Now and henceforth flaunt from these shores.	  Now and henceforth flaunt from these shores.	  Now and henceforth flaunt from these shores.
			
			
			
			
O Tan-Faced Prairie-Boy	O Tan-Faced Prairie-Boy	O Tan-Faced Prairie-Boy	O Tan-Faced Prairie-Boy
			
  O tan-faced prairie-boy,	  O tan-faced prairie-boy,	  O tan-faced prairie-boy,	  O tan-faced prairie-boy,
  Before you came to camp came many a welcome gift,	  Before you came to camp came many a welcome gift,	  Before you came to camp came many a welcome gift,	  Before you came to camp came many a welcome gift,
  Praises and presents came and nourishing food, till at last among	  Praises and presents came and nourishing food, till at last among	  Praises and presents came and nourishing food, till at last among	  Praises and presents came and nourishing food, till at last among
      the recruits,	      the recruits,	      the recruits,	      the recruits,
  You came, taciturn, with nothing to give--we but look'd on each other,	  You came, taciturn, with nothing to give--we but look'd on each other,	  You came, taciturn, with nothing to give--we but look'd on each other,	  You came, taciturn, with nothing to give--we but look'd on each other,
  When lo! more than all the gifts of the world you gave me.	  When lo! more than all the gifts of the world you gave me.	  When lo! more than all the gifts of the world you gave me.	  When lo! more than all the gifts of the world you gave me.
			
			
			
			
Look Down Fair Moon	Look Down Fair Moon	Look Down Fair Moon	Look Down Fair Moon
			
  Look down fair moon and bathe this scene,	  Look down fair moon and bathe this scene,	  Look down fair moon and bathe this scene,	  Look down fair moon and bathe this scene,
  Pour softly down night's nimbus floods on faces ghastly, swollen, purple,	  Pour softly down night's nimbus floods on faces ghastly, swollen, purple,	  Pour softly down night's nimbus floods on faces ghastly, swollen, purple,	  Pour softly down night's nimbus floods on faces ghastly, swollen, purple,
  On the dead on their backs with arms toss'd wide,	  On the dead on their backs with arms toss'd wide,	  On the dead on their backs with arms toss'd wide,	  On the dead on their backs with arms toss'd wide,
  Pour down your unstinted nimbus sacred moon.	  Pour down your unstinted nimbus sacred moon.	  Pour down your unstinted nimbus sacred moon.	  Pour down your unstinted nimbus sacred moon.
			
			
			
			
Reconciliation	Reconciliation	Reconciliation	Reconciliation
			
  Word over all, beautiful as the sky,	  Word over all, beautiful as the sky,	  Word over all, beautiful as the sky,	  Word over all, beautiful as the sky,
  Beautiful that war and all its deeds of carnage must in time be	  Beautiful that war and all its deeds of carnage must in time be	  Beautiful that war and all its deeds of carnage must in time be	  Beautiful that war and all its deeds of carnage must in time be
      utterly lost,	      utterly lost,	      utterly lost,	      utterly lost,
  That the hands of the sisters Death and Night incessantly softly	  That the hands of the sisters Death and Night incessantly softly	  That the hands of the sisters Death and Night incessantly softly	  That the hands of the sisters Death and Night incessantly softly
      wash again, and ever again, this solid world;	      wash again, and ever again, this solid world;	      wash again, and ever again, this solid world;	      wash again, and ever again, this solid world;
  For my enemy is dead, a man divine as myself is dead,	  For my enemy is dead, a man divine as myself is dead,	  For my enemy is dead, a man divine as myself is dead,	  For my enemy is dead, a man divine as myself is dead,
  I look where he lies white-faced and still in the coffin--I draw near,	  I look where he lies white-faced and still in the coffin--I draw near,	  I look where he lies white-faced and still in the coffin--I draw near,	  I look where he lies white-faced and still in the coffin--I draw near,
  Bend down and touch lightly with my lips the white face in the coffin.	  Bend down and touch lightly with my lips the white face in the coffin.	  Bend down and touch lightly with my lips the white face in the coffin.	  Bend down and touch lightly with my lips the white face in the coffin.
			
			
			
			
How Solemn As One by One [Washington City, 1865]	How Solemn As One by One [Washington City, 1865]	How Solemn As One by One [Washington City, 1865]	How Solemn As One by One [Washington City, 1865]
			
  How solemn as one by one,	  How solemn as one by one,	  How solemn as one by one,	  How solemn as one by one,
  As the ranks returning worn and sweaty, as the men file by where stand,	  As the ranks returning worn and sweaty, as the men file by where stand,	  As the ranks returning worn and sweaty, as the men file by where stand,	  As the ranks returning worn and sweaty, as the men file by where stand,
  As the faces the masks appear, as I glance at the faces studying the masks,	  As the faces the masks appear, as I glance at the faces studying the masks,	  As the faces the masks appear, as I glance at the faces studying the masks,	  As the faces the masks appear, as I glance at the faces studying the masks,
  (As I glance upward out of this page studying you, dear friend,	  (As I glance upward out of this page studying you, dear friend,	  (As I glance upward out of this page studying you, dear friend,	  (As I glance upward out of this page studying you, dear friend,
      whoever you are,)	      whoever you are,)	      whoever you are,)	      whoever you are,)
  How solemn the thought of my whispering soul to each in the ranks,	  How solemn the thought of my whispering soul to each in the ranks,	  How solemn the thought of my whispering soul to each in the ranks,	  How solemn the thought of my whispering soul to each in the ranks,
      and to you,	      and to you,	      and to you,	      and to you,
  I see behind each mask that wonder a kindred soul,	  I see behind each mask that wonder a kindred soul,	  I see behind each mask that wonder a kindred soul,	  I see behind each mask that wonder a kindred soul,
  O the bullet could never kill what you really are, dear friend,	  O the bullet could never kill what you really are, dear friend,	  O the bullet could never kill what you really are, dear friend,	  O the bullet could never kill what you really are, dear friend,
  Nor the bayonet stab what you really are;	  Nor the bayonet stab what you really are;	  Nor the bayonet stab what you really are;	  Nor the bayonet stab what you really are;
  The soul! yourself I see, great as any, good as the best,	  The soul! yourself I see, great as any, good as the best,	  The soul! yourself I see, great as any, good as the best,	  The soul! yourself I see, great as any, good as the best,
  Waiting secure and content, which the bullet could never kill,	  Waiting secure and content, which the bullet could never kill,	  Waiting secure and content, which the bullet could never kill,	  Waiting secure and content, which the bullet could never kill,
  Nor the bayonet stab O friend.	  Nor the bayonet stab O friend.	  Nor the bayonet stab O friend.	  Nor the bayonet stab O friend.
			
			
			
			
As I Lay with My Head in Your Lap Camerado	As I Lay with My Head in Your Lap Camerado	As I Lay with My Head in Your Lap Camerado	As I Lay with My Head in Your Lap Camerado
			
  As I lay with my head in your lap camerado,	  As I lay with my head in your lap camerado,	  As I lay with my head in your lap camerado,	  As I lay with my head in your lap camerado,
  The confession I made I resume, what I said to you and the open air	  The confession I made I resume, what I said to you and the open air	  The confession I made I resume, what I said to you and the open air	  The confession I made I resume, what I said to you and the open air
      I resume,	      I resume,	      I resume,	      I resume,
  I know I am restless and make others so,	  I know I am restless and make others so,	  I know I am restless and make others so,	  I know I am restless and make others so,
  I know my words are weapons full of danger, full of death,	  I know my words are weapons full of danger, full of death,	  I know my words are weapons full of danger, full of death,	  I know my words are weapons full of danger, full of death,
  For I confront peace, security, and all the settled laws, to	  For I confront peace, security, and all the settled laws, to	  For I confront peace, security, and all the settled laws, to	  For I confront peace, security, and all the settled laws, to
      unsettle them,	      unsettle them,	      unsettle them,	      unsettle them,
  I am more resolute because all have denied me than I could ever have	  I am more resolute because all have denied me than I could ever have	  I am more resolute because all have denied me than I could ever have	  I am more resolute because all have denied me than I could ever have
      been had all accepted me,	      been had all accepted me,	      been had all accepted me,	      been had all accepted me,
  I heed not and have never heeded either experience, cautions,	  I heed not and have never heeded either experience, cautions,	  I heed not and have never heeded either experience, cautions,	  I heed not and have never heeded either experience, cautions,
      majorities, nor ridicule,	      majorities, nor ridicule,	      majorities, nor ridicule,	      majorities, nor ridicule,
  And the threat of what is call'd hell is little or nothing to me,	  And the threat of what is call'd hell is little or nothing to me,	  And the threat of what is call'd hell is little or nothing to me,	  And the threat of what is call'd hell is little or nothing to me,
  And the lure of what is call'd heaven is little or nothing to me;	  And the lure of what is call'd heaven is little or nothing to me;	  And the lure of what is call'd heaven is little or nothing to me;	  And the lure of what is call'd heaven is little or nothing to me;
  Dear camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me, and still	  Dear camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me, and still	  Dear camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me, and still	  Dear camerado! I confess I have urged you onward with me, and still
      urge you, without the least idea what is our destination,	      urge you, without the least idea what is our destination,	      urge you, without the least idea what is our destination,	      urge you, without the least idea what is our destination,
  Or whether we shall be victorious, or utterly quell'd and defeated.	  Or whether we shall be victorious, or utterly quell'd and defeated.	  Or whether we shall be victorious, or utterly quell'd and defeated.	  Or whether we shall be victorious, or utterly quell'd and defeated.
			
			
			
			
Delicate Cluster	Delicate Cluster	Delicate Cluster	Delicate Cluster
			
  Delicate cluster! flag of teeming life!	  Delicate cluster! flag of teeming life!	  Delicate cluster! flag of teeming life!	  Delicate cluster! flag of teeming life!
  Covering all my lands--all my seashores lining!	  Covering all my lands--all my seashores lining!	  Covering all my lands--all my seashores lining!	  Covering all my lands--all my seashores lining!
  Flag of death! (how I watch'd you through the smoke of battle pressing!	  Flag of death! (how I watch'd you through the smoke of battle pressing!	  Flag of death! (how I watch'd you through the smoke of battle pressing!	  Flag of death! (how I watch'd you through the smoke of battle pressing!
  How I heard you flap and rustle, cloth defiant!)	  How I heard you flap and rustle, cloth defiant!)	  How I heard you flap and rustle, cloth defiant!)	  How I heard you flap and rustle, cloth defiant!)
  Flag cerulean--sunny flag, with the orbs of night dappled!	  Flag cerulean--sunny flag, with the orbs of night dappled!	  Flag cerulean--sunny flag, with the orbs of night dappled!	  Flag cerulean--sunny flag, with the orbs of night dappled!
  Ah my silvery beauty--ah my woolly white and crimson!	  Ah my silvery beauty--ah my woolly white and crimson!	  Ah my silvery beauty--ah my woolly white and crimson!	  Ah my silvery beauty--ah my woolly white and crimson!
  Ah to sing the song of you, my matron mighty!	  Ah to sing the song of you, my matron mighty!	  Ah to sing the song of you, my matron mighty!	  Ah to sing the song of you, my matron mighty!
  My sacred one, my mother.	  My sacred one, my mother.	  My sacred one, my mother.	  My sacred one, my mother.
			
			
			
			
To a Certain Civilian	To a Certain Civilian	To a Certain Civilian	To a Certain Civilian
			
  Did you ask dulcet rhymes from me?	  Did you ask dulcet rhymes from me?	  Did you ask dulcet rhymes from me?	  Did you ask dulcet rhymes from me?
  Did you seek the civilian's peaceful and languishing rhymes?	  Did you seek the civilian's peaceful and languishing rhymes?	  Did you seek the civilian's peaceful and languishing rhymes?	  Did you seek the civilian's peaceful and languishing rhymes?
  Did you find what I sang erewhile so hard to follow?	  Did you find what I sang erewhile so hard to follow?	  Did you find what I sang erewhile so hard to follow?	  Did you find what I sang erewhile so hard to follow?
  Why I was not singing erewhile for you to follow, to understand--nor	  Why I was not singing erewhile for you to follow, to understand--nor	  Why I was not singing erewhile for you to follow, to understand--nor	  Why I was not singing erewhile for you to follow, to understand--nor
      am I now;	      am I now;	      am I now;	      am I now;
  (I have been born of the same as the war was born,	  (I have been born of the same as the war was born,	  (I have been born of the same as the war was born,	  (I have been born of the same as the war was born,
  The drum-corps' rattle is ever to me sweet music, I love well the	  The drum-corps' rattle is ever to me sweet music, I love well the	  The drum-corps' rattle is ever to me sweet music, I love well the	  The drum-corps' rattle is ever to me sweet music, I love well the
      martial dirge,	      martial dirge,	      martial dirge,	      martial dirge,
  With slow wail and convulsive throb leading the officer's funeral;)	  With slow wail and convulsive throb leading the officer's funeral;)	  With slow wail and convulsive throb leading the officer's funeral;)	  With slow wail and convulsive throb leading the officer's funeral;)
  What to such as you anyhow such a poet as I? therefore leave my works,	  What to such as you anyhow such a poet as I? therefore leave my works,	  What to such as you anyhow such a poet as I? therefore leave my works,	  What to such as you anyhow such a poet as I? therefore leave my works,
  And go lull yourself with what you can understand, and with piano-tunes,	  And go lull yourself with what you can understand, and with piano-tunes,	  And go lull yourself with what you can understand, and with piano-tunes,	  And go lull yourself with what you can understand, and with piano-tunes,
  For I lull nobody, and you will never understand me.	  For I lull nobody, and you will never understand me.	  For I lull nobody, and you will never understand me.	  For I lull nobody, and you will never understand me.
			
			
			
			
Lo, Victress on the Peaks	Lo, Victress on the Peaks	Lo, Victress on the Peaks	Lo, Victress on the Peaks
			
  Lo, Victress on the peaks,	  Lo, Victress on the peaks,	  Lo, Victress on the peaks,	  Lo, Victress on the peaks,
  Where thou with mighty brow regarding the world,	  Where thou with mighty brow regarding the world,	  Where thou with mighty brow regarding the world,	  Where thou with mighty brow regarding the world,
  (The world O Libertad, that vainly conspired against thee,)	  (The world O Libertad, that vainly conspired against thee,)	  (The world O Libertad, that vainly conspired against thee,)	  (The world O Libertad, that vainly conspired against thee,)
  Out of its countless beleaguering toils, after thwarting them all,	  Out of its countless beleaguering toils, after thwarting them all,	  Out of its countless beleaguering toils, after thwarting them all,	  Out of its countless beleaguering toils, after thwarting them all,
  Dominant, with the dazzling sun around thee,	  Dominant, with the dazzling sun around thee,	  Dominant, with the dazzling sun around thee,	  Dominant, with the dazzling sun around thee,
  Flauntest now unharm'd in immortal soundness and bloom--lo, in	  Flauntest now unharm'd in immortal soundness and bloom--lo, in	  Flauntest now unharm'd in immortal soundness and bloom--lo, in	  Flauntest now unharm'd in immortal soundness and bloom--lo, in
      these hours supreme,	      these hours supreme,	      these hours supreme,	      these hours supreme,
  No poem proud, I chanting bring to thee, nor mastery's rapturous verse,	  No poem proud, I chanting bring to thee, nor mastery's rapturous verse,	  No poem proud, I chanting bring to thee, nor mastery's rapturous verse,	  No poem proud, I chanting bring to thee, nor mastery's rapturous verse,
  But a cluster containing night's darkness and blood-dripping wounds,	  But a cluster containing night's darkness and blood-dripping wounds,	  But a cluster containing night's darkness and blood-dripping wounds,	  But a cluster containing night's darkness and blood-dripping wounds,
  And psalms of the dead.	  And psalms of the dead.	  And psalms of the dead.	  And psalms of the dead.
			
			
			
			
Spirit Whose Work Is Done [Washington City, 1865]	Spirit Whose Work Is Done [Washington City, 1865]	Spirit Whose Work Is Done [Washington City, 1865]	Spirit Whose Work Is Done [Washington City, 1865]
			
  Spirit whose work is done--spirit of dreadful hours!	  Spirit whose work is done--spirit of dreadful hours!	  Spirit whose work is done--spirit of dreadful hours!	  Spirit whose work is done--spirit of dreadful hours!
  Ere departing fade from my eyes your forests of bayonets;	  Ere departing fade from my eyes your forests of bayonets;	  Ere departing fade from my eyes your forests of bayonets;	  Ere departing fade from my eyes your forests of bayonets;
  Spirit of gloomiest fears and doubts, (yet onward ever unfaltering	  Spirit of gloomiest fears and doubts, (yet onward ever unfaltering	  Spirit of gloomiest fears and doubts, (yet onward ever unfaltering	  Spirit of gloomiest fears and doubts, (yet onward ever unfaltering
      pressing,)	      pressing,)	      pressing,)	      pressing,)
  Spirit of many a solemn day and many a savage scene--electric spirit,	  Spirit of many a solemn day and many a savage scene--electric spirit,	  Spirit of many a solemn day and many a savage scene--electric spirit,	  Spirit of many a solemn day and many a savage scene--electric spirit,
  That with muttering voice through the war now closed, like a	  That with muttering voice through the war now closed, like a	  That with muttering voice through the war now closed, like a	  That with muttering voice through the war now closed, like a
      tireless phantom flitted,	      tireless phantom flitted,	      tireless phantom flitted,	      tireless phantom flitted,
  Rousing the land with breath of flame, while you beat and beat the drum,	  Rousing the land with breath of flame, while you beat and beat the drum,	  Rousing the land with breath of flame, while you beat and beat the drum,	  Rousing the land with breath of flame, while you beat and beat the drum,
  Now as the sound of the drum, hollow and harsh to the last,	  Now as the sound of the drum, hollow and harsh to the last,	  Now as the sound of the drum, hollow and harsh to the last,	  Now as the sound of the drum, hollow and harsh to the last,
      reverberates round me,	      reverberates round me,	      reverberates round me,	      reverberates round me,
  As your ranks, your immortal ranks, return, return from the battles,	  As your ranks, your immortal ranks, return, return from the battles,	  As your ranks, your immortal ranks, return, return from the battles,	  As your ranks, your immortal ranks, return, return from the battles,
  As the muskets of the young men yet lean over their shoulders,	  As the muskets of the young men yet lean over their shoulders,	  As the muskets of the young men yet lean over their shoulders,	  As the muskets of the young men yet lean over their shoulders,
  As I look on the bayonets bristling over their shoulders,	  As I look on the bayonets bristling over their shoulders,	  As I look on the bayonets bristling over their shoulders,	  As I look on the bayonets bristling over their shoulders,
  As those slanted bayonets, whole forests of them appearing in the	  As those slanted bayonets, whole forests of them appearing in the	  As those slanted bayonets, whole forests of them appearing in the	  As those slanted bayonets, whole forests of them appearing in the
      distance, approach and pass on, returning homeward,	      distance, approach and pass on, returning homeward,	      distance, approach and pass on, returning homeward,	      distance, approach and pass on, returning homeward,
  Moving with steady motion, swaying to and fro to the right and left,	  Moving with steady motion, swaying to and fro to the right and left,	  Moving with steady motion, swaying to and fro to the right and left,	  Moving with steady motion, swaying to and fro to the right and left,
  Evenly lightly rising and falling while the steps keep time;	  Evenly lightly rising and falling while the steps keep time;	  Evenly lightly rising and falling while the steps keep time;	  Evenly lightly rising and falling while the steps keep time;
  Spirit of hours I knew, all hectic red one day, but pale as death next day,	  Spirit of hours I knew, all hectic red one day, but pale as death next day,	  Spirit of hours I knew, all hectic red one day, but pale as death next day,	  Spirit of hours I knew, all hectic red one day, but pale as death next day,
  Touch my mouth ere you depart, press my lips close,	  Touch my mouth ere you depart, press my lips close,	  Touch my mouth ere you depart, press my lips close,	  Touch my mouth ere you depart, press my lips close,
  Leave me your pulses of rage--bequeath them to me--fill me with	  Leave me your pulses of rage--bequeath them to me--fill me with	  Leave me your pulses of rage--bequeath them to me--fill me with	  Leave me your pulses of rage--bequeath them to me--fill me with
      currents convulsive,	      currents convulsive,	      currents convulsive,	      currents convulsive,
  Let them scorch and blister out of my chants when you are gone,	  Let them scorch and blister out of my chants when you are gone,	  Let them scorch and blister out of my chants when you are gone,	  Let them scorch and blister out of my chants when you are gone,
  Let them identify you to the future in these songs.	  Let them identify you to the future in these songs.	  Let them identify you to the future in these songs.	  Let them identify you to the future in these songs.
			
			
			
			
Adieu to a Soldier	Adieu to a Soldier	Adieu to a Soldier	Adieu to a Soldier
			
  Adieu O soldier,	  Adieu O soldier,	  Adieu O soldier,	  Adieu O soldier,
  You of the rude campaigning, (which we shared,)	  You of the rude campaigning, (which we shared,)	  You of the rude campaigning, (which we shared,)	  You of the rude campaigning, (which we shared,)
  The rapid march, the life of the camp,	  The rapid march, the life of the camp,	  The rapid march, the life of the camp,	  The rapid march, the life of the camp,
  The hot contention of opposing fronts, the long manoeuvre,	  The hot contention of opposing fronts, the long manoeuvre,	  The hot contention of opposing fronts, the long manoeuvre,	  The hot contention of opposing fronts, the long manoeuvre,
  Red battles with their slaughter, the stimulus, the strong terrific game,	  Red battles with their slaughter, the stimulus, the strong terrific game,	  Red battles with their slaughter, the stimulus, the strong terrific game,	  Red battles with their slaughter, the stimulus, the strong terrific game,
  Spell of all brave and manly hearts, the trains of time through you	  Spell of all brave and manly hearts, the trains of time through you	  Spell of all brave and manly hearts, the trains of time through you	  Spell of all brave and manly hearts, the trains of time through you
      and like of you all fill'd,	      and like of you all fill'd,	      and like of you all fill'd,	      and like of you all fill'd,
  With war and war's expression.	  With war and war's expression.	  With war and war's expression.	  With war and war's expression.
			
  Adieu dear comrade,	  Adieu dear comrade,	  Adieu dear comrade,	  Adieu dear comrade,
  Your mission is fulfill'd--but I, more warlike,	  Your mission is fulfill'd--but I, more warlike,	  Your mission is fulfill'd--but I, more warlike,	  Your mission is fulfill'd--but I, more warlike,
  Myself and this contentious soul of mine,	  Myself and this contentious soul of mine,	  Myself and this contentious soul of mine,	  Myself and this contentious soul of mine,
  Still on our own campaigning bound,	  Still on our own campaigning bound,	  Still on our own campaigning bound,	  Still on our own campaigning bound,
  Through untried roads with ambushes opponents lined,	  Through untried roads with ambushes opponents lined,	  Through untried roads with ambushes opponents lined,	  Through untried roads with ambushes opponents lined,
  Through many a sharp defeat and many a crisis, often baffled,	  Through many a sharp defeat and many a crisis, often baffled,	  Through many a sharp defeat and many a crisis, often baffled,	  Through many a sharp defeat and many a crisis, often baffled,
  Here marching, ever marching on, a war fight out--aye here,	  Here marching, ever marching on, a war fight out--aye here,	  Here marching, ever marching on, a war fight out--aye here,	  Here marching, ever marching on, a war fight out--aye here,
  To fiercer, weightier battles give expression.	  To fiercer, weightier battles give expression.	  To fiercer, weightier battles give expression.	  To fiercer, weightier battles give expression.
			
			
			
			
Turn O Libertad	Turn O Libertad	Turn O Libertad	Turn O Libertad
			
  Turn O Libertad, for the war is over,	  Turn O Libertad, for the war is over,	  Turn O Libertad, for the war is over,	  Turn O Libertad, for the war is over,
  From it and all henceforth expanding, doubting no more, resolute,	  From it and all henceforth expanding, doubting no more, resolute,	  From it and all henceforth expanding, doubting no more, resolute,	  From it and all henceforth expanding, doubting no more, resolute,
      sweeping the world,	      sweeping the world,	      sweeping the world,	      sweeping the world,
  Turn from lands retrospective recording proofs of the past,	  Turn from lands retrospective recording proofs of the past,	  Turn from lands retrospective recording proofs of the past,	  Turn from lands retrospective recording proofs of the past,
  From the singers that sing the trailing glories of the past,	  From the singers that sing the trailing glories of the past,	  From the singers that sing the trailing glories of the past,	  From the singers that sing the trailing glories of the past,
  From the chants of the feudal world, the triumphs of kings, slavery, caste,	  From the chants of the feudal world, the triumphs of kings, slavery, caste,	  From the chants of the feudal world, the triumphs of kings, slavery, caste,	  From the chants of the feudal world, the triumphs of kings, slavery, caste,
  Turn to the world, the triumphs reserv'd and to come--give up that	  Turn to the world, the triumphs reserv'd and to come--give up that	  Turn to the world, the triumphs reserv'd and to come--give up that	  Turn to the world, the triumphs reserv'd and to come--give up that
      backward world,	      backward world,	      backward world,	      backward world,
  Leave to the singers of hitherto, give them the trailing past,	  Leave to the singers of hitherto, give them the trailing past,	  Leave to the singers of hitherto, give them the trailing past,	  Leave to the singers of hitherto, give them the trailing past,
  But what remains remains for singers for you--wars to come are for you,	  But what remains remains for singers for you--wars to come are for you,	  But what remains remains for singers for you--wars to come are for you,	  But what remains remains for singers for you--wars to come are for you,
  (Lo, how the wars of the past have duly inured to you, and the wars	  (Lo, how the wars of the past have duly inured to you, and the wars	  (Lo, how the wars of the past have duly inured to you, and the wars	  (Lo, how the wars of the past have duly inured to you, and the wars
      of the present also inure;)	      of the present also inure;)	      of the present also inure;)	      of the present also inure;)
  Then turn, and be not alarm'd O Libertad--turn your undying face,	  Then turn, and be not alarm'd O Libertad--turn your undying face,	  Then turn, and be not alarm'd O Libertad--turn your undying face,	  Then turn, and be not alarm'd O Libertad--turn your undying face,
  To where the future, greater than all the past,	  To where the future, greater than all the past,	  To where the future, greater than all the past,	  To where the future, greater than all the past,
  Is swiftly, surely preparing for you.	  Is swiftly, surely preparing for you.	  Is swiftly, surely preparing for you.	  Is swiftly, surely preparing for you.
			
			
			
			
To the Leaven'd Soil They Trod	To the Leaven'd Soil They Trod	To the Leaven'd Soil They Trod	To the Leaven'd Soil They Trod
			
  To the leaven'd soil they trod calling I sing for the last,	  To the leaven'd soil they trod calling I sing for the last,	  To the leaven'd soil they trod calling I sing for the last,	  To the leaven'd soil they trod calling I sing for the last,
  (Forth from my tent emerging for good, loosing, untying the tent-ropes,)	  (Forth from my tent emerging for good, loosing, untying the tent-ropes,)	  (Forth from my tent emerging for good, loosing, untying the tent-ropes,)	  (Forth from my tent emerging for good, loosing, untying the tent-ropes,)
  In the freshness the forenoon air, in the far-stretching circuits	  In the freshness the forenoon air, in the far-stretching circuits	  In the freshness the forenoon air, in the far-stretching circuits	  In the freshness the forenoon air, in the far-stretching circuits
      and vistas again to peace restored,	      and vistas again to peace restored,	      and vistas again to peace restored,	      and vistas again to peace restored,
  To the fiery fields emanative and the endless vistas beyond, to the	  To the fiery fields emanative and the endless vistas beyond, to the	  To the fiery fields emanative and the endless vistas beyond, to the	  To the fiery fields emanative and the endless vistas beyond, to the
      South and the North,	      South and the North,	      South and the North,	      South and the North,
  To the leaven'd soil of the general Western world to attest my songs,	  To the leaven'd soil of the general Western world to attest my songs,	  To the leaven'd soil of the general Western world to attest my songs,	  To the leaven'd soil of the general Western world to attest my songs,
  To the Alleghanian hills and the tireless Mississippi,	  To the Alleghanian hills and the tireless Mississippi,	  To the Alleghanian hills and the tireless Mississippi,	  To the Alleghanian hills and the tireless Mississippi,
  To the rocks I calling sing, and all the trees in the woods,	  To the rocks I calling sing, and all the trees in the woods,	  To the rocks I calling sing, and all the trees in the woods,	  To the rocks I calling sing, and all the trees in the woods,
  To the plains of the poems of heroes, to the prairies spreading wide,	  To the plains of the poems of heroes, to the prairies spreading wide,	  To the plains of the poems of heroes, to the prairies spreading wide,	  To the plains of the poems of heroes, to the prairies spreading wide,
  To the far-off sea and the unseen winds, and the sane impalpable air;	  To the far-off sea and the unseen winds, and the sane impalpable air;	  To the far-off sea and the unseen winds, and the sane impalpable air;	  To the far-off sea and the unseen winds, and the sane impalpable air;
  And responding they answer all, (but not in words,)	  And responding they answer all, (but not in words,)	  And responding they answer all, (but not in words,)	  And responding they answer all, (but not in words,)
  The average earth, the witness of war and peace, acknowledges mutely,	  The average earth, the witness of war and peace, acknowledges mutely,	  The average earth, the witness of war and peace, acknowledges mutely,	  The average earth, the witness of war and peace, acknowledges mutely,
  The prairie draws me close, as the father to bosom broad the son,	  The prairie draws me close, as the father to bosom broad the son,	  The prairie draws me close, as the father to bosom broad the son,	  The prairie draws me close, as the father to bosom broad the son,
  The Northern ice and rain that began me nourish me to the end,	  The Northern ice and rain that began me nourish me to the end,	  The Northern ice and rain that began me nourish me to the end,	  The Northern ice and rain that began me nourish me to the end,
  But the hot sun of the South is to fully ripen my songs.	  But the hot sun of the South is to fully ripen my songs.	  But the hot sun of the South is to fully ripen my songs.	  But the hot sun of the South is to fully ripen my songs.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXII.  MEMORIES OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN	BOOK XXII.  MEMORIES OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN	BOOK XXII.  MEMORIES OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN	BOOK XXII.  MEMORIES OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN
			
			
When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd	When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd	When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd	When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd,	  When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd,	  When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd,	  When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd,
  And the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the night,	  And the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the night,	  And the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the night,	  And the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the night,
  I mourn'd, and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring.	  I mourn'd, and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring.	  I mourn'd, and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring.	  I mourn'd, and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring.
			
  Ever-returning spring, trinity sure to me you bring,	  Ever-returning spring, trinity sure to me you bring,	  Ever-returning spring, trinity sure to me you bring,	  Ever-returning spring, trinity sure to me you bring,
  Lilac blooming perennial and drooping star in the west,	  Lilac blooming perennial and drooping star in the west,	  Lilac blooming perennial and drooping star in the west,	  Lilac blooming perennial and drooping star in the west,
  And thought of him I love.	  And thought of him I love.	  And thought of him I love.	  And thought of him I love.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  O powerful western fallen star!	  O powerful western fallen star!	  O powerful western fallen star!	  O powerful western fallen star!
  O shades of night--O moody, tearful night!	  O shades of night--O moody, tearful night!	  O shades of night--O moody, tearful night!	  O shades of night--O moody, tearful night!
  O great star disappear'd--O the black murk that hides the star!	  O great star disappear'd--O the black murk that hides the star!	  O great star disappear'd--O the black murk that hides the star!	  O great star disappear'd--O the black murk that hides the star!
  O cruel hands that hold me powerless--O helpless soul of me!	  O cruel hands that hold me powerless--O helpless soul of me!	  O cruel hands that hold me powerless--O helpless soul of me!	  O cruel hands that hold me powerless--O helpless soul of me!
  O harsh surrounding cloud that will not free my soul.	  O harsh surrounding cloud that will not free my soul.	  O harsh surrounding cloud that will not free my soul.	  O harsh surrounding cloud that will not free my soul.
			
			
      3	      3	      3	      3
  In the dooryard fronting an old farm-house near the white-wash'd palings,	  In the dooryard fronting an old farm-house near the white-wash'd palings,	  In the dooryard fronting an old farm-house near the white-wash'd palings,	  In the dooryard fronting an old farm-house near the white-wash'd palings,
  Stands the lilac-bush tall-growing with heart-shaped leaves of rich green,	  Stands the lilac-bush tall-growing with heart-shaped leaves of rich green,	  Stands the lilac-bush tall-growing with heart-shaped leaves of rich green,	  Stands the lilac-bush tall-growing with heart-shaped leaves of rich green,
  With many a pointed blossom rising delicate, with the perfume strong I love,	  With many a pointed blossom rising delicate, with the perfume strong I love,	  With many a pointed blossom rising delicate, with the perfume strong I love,	  With many a pointed blossom rising delicate, with the perfume strong I love,
  With every leaf a miracle--and from this bush in the dooryard,	  With every leaf a miracle--and from this bush in the dooryard,	  With every leaf a miracle--and from this bush in the dooryard,	  With every leaf a miracle--and from this bush in the dooryard,
  With delicate-color'd blossoms and heart-shaped leaves of rich green,	  With delicate-color'd blossoms and heart-shaped leaves of rich green,	  With delicate-color'd blossoms and heart-shaped leaves of rich green,	  With delicate-color'd blossoms and heart-shaped leaves of rich green,
  A sprig with its flower I break.	  A sprig with its flower I break.	  A sprig with its flower I break.	  A sprig with its flower I break.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  In the swamp in secluded recesses,	  In the swamp in secluded recesses,	  In the swamp in secluded recesses,	  In the swamp in secluded recesses,
  A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song.	  A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song.	  A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song.	  A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song.
			
  Solitary the thrush,	  Solitary the thrush,	  Solitary the thrush,	  Solitary the thrush,
  The hermit withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements,	  The hermit withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements,	  The hermit withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements,	  The hermit withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements,
  Sings by himself a song.	  Sings by himself a song.	  Sings by himself a song.	  Sings by himself a song.
			
  Song of the bleeding throat,	  Song of the bleeding throat,	  Song of the bleeding throat,	  Song of the bleeding throat,
  Death's outlet song of life, (for well dear brother I know,	  Death's outlet song of life, (for well dear brother I know,	  Death's outlet song of life, (for well dear brother I know,	  Death's outlet song of life, (for well dear brother I know,
  If thou wast not granted to sing thou wouldst surely die.)	  If thou wast not granted to sing thou wouldst surely die.)	  If thou wast not granted to sing thou wouldst surely die.)	  If thou wast not granted to sing thou wouldst surely die.)
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities,	  Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities,	  Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities,	  Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities,
  Amid lanes and through old woods, where lately the violets peep'd	  Amid lanes and through old woods, where lately the violets peep'd	  Amid lanes and through old woods, where lately the violets peep'd	  Amid lanes and through old woods, where lately the violets peep'd
      from the ground, spotting the gray debris,	      from the ground, spotting the gray debris,	      from the ground, spotting the gray debris,	      from the ground, spotting the gray debris,
  Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes, passing the	  Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes, passing the	  Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes, passing the	  Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes, passing the
      endless grass,	      endless grass,	      endless grass,	      endless grass,
  Passing the yellow-spear'd wheat, every grain from its shroud in the	  Passing the yellow-spear'd wheat, every grain from its shroud in the	  Passing the yellow-spear'd wheat, every grain from its shroud in the	  Passing the yellow-spear'd wheat, every grain from its shroud in the
      dark-brown fields uprisen,	      dark-brown fields uprisen,	      dark-brown fields uprisen,	      dark-brown fields uprisen,
  Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the orchards,	  Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the orchards,	  Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the orchards,	  Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the orchards,
  Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave,	  Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave,	  Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave,	  Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave,
  Night and day journeys a coffin.	  Night and day journeys a coffin.	  Night and day journeys a coffin.	  Night and day journeys a coffin.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Coffin that passes through lanes and streets,	  Coffin that passes through lanes and streets,	  Coffin that passes through lanes and streets,	  Coffin that passes through lanes and streets,
  Through day and night with the great cloud darkening the land,	  Through day and night with the great cloud darkening the land,	  Through day and night with the great cloud darkening the land,	  Through day and night with the great cloud darkening the land,
  With the pomp of the inloop'd flags with the cities draped in black,	  With the pomp of the inloop'd flags with the cities draped in black,	  With the pomp of the inloop'd flags with the cities draped in black,	  With the pomp of the inloop'd flags with the cities draped in black,
  With the show of the States themselves as of crape-veil'd women standing,	  With the show of the States themselves as of crape-veil'd women standing,	  With the show of the States themselves as of crape-veil'd women standing,	  With the show of the States themselves as of crape-veil'd women standing,
  With processions long and winding and the flambeaus of the night,	  With processions long and winding and the flambeaus of the night,	  With processions long and winding and the flambeaus of the night,	  With processions long and winding and the flambeaus of the night,
  With the countless torches lit, with the silent sea of faces and the	  With the countless torches lit, with the silent sea of faces and the	  With the countless torches lit, with the silent sea of faces and the	  With the countless torches lit, with the silent sea of faces and the
      unbared heads,	      unbared heads,	      unbared heads,	      unbared heads,
  With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre faces,	  With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre faces,	  With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre faces,	  With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre faces,
  With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices rising strong	  With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices rising strong	  With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices rising strong	  With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices rising strong
      and solemn,	      and solemn,	      and solemn,	      and solemn,
  With all the mournful voices of the dirges pour'd around the coffin,	  With all the mournful voices of the dirges pour'd around the coffin,	  With all the mournful voices of the dirges pour'd around the coffin,	  With all the mournful voices of the dirges pour'd around the coffin,
  The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs--where amid these	  The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs--where amid these	  The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs--where amid these	  The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs--where amid these
      you journey,	      you journey,	      you journey,	      you journey,
  With the tolling tolling bells' perpetual clang,	  With the tolling tolling bells' perpetual clang,	  With the tolling tolling bells' perpetual clang,	  With the tolling tolling bells' perpetual clang,
  Here, coffin that slowly passes,	  Here, coffin that slowly passes,	  Here, coffin that slowly passes,	  Here, coffin that slowly passes,
  I give you my sprig of lilac.	  I give you my sprig of lilac.	  I give you my sprig of lilac.	  I give you my sprig of lilac.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  (Nor for you, for one alone,	  (Nor for you, for one alone,	  (Nor for you, for one alone,	  (Nor for you, for one alone,
  Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring,	  Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring,	  Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring,	  Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring,
  For fresh as the morning, thus would I chant a song for you O sane	  For fresh as the morning, thus would I chant a song for you O sane	  For fresh as the morning, thus would I chant a song for you O sane	  For fresh as the morning, thus would I chant a song for you O sane
      and sacred death.	      and sacred death.	      and sacred death.	      and sacred death.
			
  All over bouquets of roses,	  All over bouquets of roses,	  All over bouquets of roses,	  All over bouquets of roses,
  O death, I cover you over with roses and early lilies,	  O death, I cover you over with roses and early lilies,	  O death, I cover you over with roses and early lilies,	  O death, I cover you over with roses and early lilies,
  But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first,	  But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first,	  But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first,	  But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first,
  Copious I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes,	  Copious I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes,	  Copious I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes,	  Copious I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes,
  With loaded arms I come, pouring for you,	  With loaded arms I come, pouring for you,	  With loaded arms I come, pouring for you,	  With loaded arms I come, pouring for you,
  For you and the coffins all of you O death.)	  For you and the coffins all of you O death.)	  For you and the coffins all of you O death.)	  For you and the coffins all of you O death.)
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  O western orb sailing the heaven,	  O western orb sailing the heaven,	  O western orb sailing the heaven,	  O western orb sailing the heaven,
  Now I know what you must have meant as a month since I walk'd,	  Now I know what you must have meant as a month since I walk'd,	  Now I know what you must have meant as a month since I walk'd,	  Now I know what you must have meant as a month since I walk'd,
  As I walk'd in silence the transparent shadowy night,	  As I walk'd in silence the transparent shadowy night,	  As I walk'd in silence the transparent shadowy night,	  As I walk'd in silence the transparent shadowy night,
  As I saw you had something to tell as you bent to me night after night,	  As I saw you had something to tell as you bent to me night after night,	  As I saw you had something to tell as you bent to me night after night,	  As I saw you had something to tell as you bent to me night after night,
  As you droop'd from the sky low down as if to my side, (while the	  As you droop'd from the sky low down as if to my side, (while the	  As you droop'd from the sky low down as if to my side, (while the	  As you droop'd from the sky low down as if to my side, (while the
      other stars all look'd on,)	      other stars all look'd on,)	      other stars all look'd on,)	      other stars all look'd on,)
  As we wander'd together the solemn night, (for something I know not	  As we wander'd together the solemn night, (for something I know not	  As we wander'd together the solemn night, (for something I know not	  As we wander'd together the solemn night, (for something I know not
      what kept me from sleep,)	      what kept me from sleep,)	      what kept me from sleep,)	      what kept me from sleep,)
  As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west how full you	  As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west how full you	  As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west how full you	  As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west how full you
      were of woe,	      were of woe,	      were of woe,	      were of woe,
  As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze in the cool transparent night,	  As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze in the cool transparent night,	  As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze in the cool transparent night,	  As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze in the cool transparent night,
  As I watch'd where you pass'd and was lost in the netherward black	  As I watch'd where you pass'd and was lost in the netherward black	  As I watch'd where you pass'd and was lost in the netherward black	  As I watch'd where you pass'd and was lost in the netherward black
      of the night,	      of the night,	      of the night,	      of the night,
  As my soul in its trouble dissatisfied sank, as where you sad orb,	  As my soul in its trouble dissatisfied sank, as where you sad orb,	  As my soul in its trouble dissatisfied sank, as where you sad orb,	  As my soul in its trouble dissatisfied sank, as where you sad orb,
  Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone.	  Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone.	  Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone.	  Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  Sing on there in the swamp,	  Sing on there in the swamp,	  Sing on there in the swamp,	  Sing on there in the swamp,
  O singer bashful and tender, I hear your notes, I hear your call,	  O singer bashful and tender, I hear your notes, I hear your call,	  O singer bashful and tender, I hear your notes, I hear your call,	  O singer bashful and tender, I hear your notes, I hear your call,
  I hear, I come presently, I understand you,	  I hear, I come presently, I understand you,	  I hear, I come presently, I understand you,	  I hear, I come presently, I understand you,
  But a moment I linger, for the lustrous star has detain'd me,	  But a moment I linger, for the lustrous star has detain'd me,	  But a moment I linger, for the lustrous star has detain'd me,	  But a moment I linger, for the lustrous star has detain'd me,
  The star my departing comrade holds and detains me.	  The star my departing comrade holds and detains me.	  The star my departing comrade holds and detains me.	  The star my departing comrade holds and detains me.
			
       10	       10	       10	       10
  O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I loved?	  O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I loved?	  O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I loved?	  O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I loved?
  And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that has gone?	  And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that has gone?	  And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that has gone?	  And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that has gone?
  And what shall my perfume be for the grave of him I love?	  And what shall my perfume be for the grave of him I love?	  And what shall my perfume be for the grave of him I love?	  And what shall my perfume be for the grave of him I love?
			
  Sea-winds blown from east and west,	  Sea-winds blown from east and west,	  Sea-winds blown from east and west,	  Sea-winds blown from east and west,
  Blown from the Eastern sea and blown from the Western sea, till	  Blown from the Eastern sea and blown from the Western sea, till	  Blown from the Eastern sea and blown from the Western sea, till	  Blown from the Eastern sea and blown from the Western sea, till
      there on the prairies meeting,	      there on the prairies meeting,	      there on the prairies meeting,	      there on the prairies meeting,
  These and with these and the breath of my chant,	  These and with these and the breath of my chant,	  These and with these and the breath of my chant,	  These and with these and the breath of my chant,
  I'll perfume the grave of him I love.	  I'll perfume the grave of him I love.	  I'll perfume the grave of him I love.	  I'll perfume the grave of him I love.
			
       11	       11	       11	       11
  O what shall I hang on the chamber walls?	  O what shall I hang on the chamber walls?	  O what shall I hang on the chamber walls?	  O what shall I hang on the chamber walls?
  And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls,	  And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls,	  And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls,	  And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls,
  To adorn the burial-house of him I love?	  To adorn the burial-house of him I love?	  To adorn the burial-house of him I love?	  To adorn the burial-house of him I love?
  Pictures of growing spring and farms and homes,	  Pictures of growing spring and farms and homes,	  Pictures of growing spring and farms and homes,	  Pictures of growing spring and farms and homes,
  With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray smoke lucid and bright,	  With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray smoke lucid and bright,	  With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray smoke lucid and bright,	  With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray smoke lucid and bright,
  With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent, sinking	  With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent, sinking	  With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent, sinking	  With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent, sinking
      sun, burning, expanding the air,	      sun, burning, expanding the air,	      sun, burning, expanding the air,	      sun, burning, expanding the air,
  With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green leaves	  With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green leaves	  With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green leaves	  With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green leaves
      of the trees prolific,	      of the trees prolific,	      of the trees prolific,	      of the trees prolific,
  In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river, with a	  In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river, with a	  In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river, with a	  In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river, with a
      wind-dapple here and there,	      wind-dapple here and there,	      wind-dapple here and there,	      wind-dapple here and there,
  With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against the sky,	  With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against the sky,	  With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against the sky,	  With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against the sky,
      and shadows,	      and shadows,	      and shadows,	      and shadows,
  And the city at hand with dwellings so dense, and stacks of chimneys,	  And the city at hand with dwellings so dense, and stacks of chimneys,	  And the city at hand with dwellings so dense, and stacks of chimneys,	  And the city at hand with dwellings so dense, and stacks of chimneys,
  And all the scenes of life and the workshops, and the workmen	  And all the scenes of life and the workshops, and the workmen	  And all the scenes of life and the workshops, and the workmen	  And all the scenes of life and the workshops, and the workmen
      homeward returning.	      homeward returning.	      homeward returning.	      homeward returning.
			
       12	       12	       12	       12
  Lo, body and soul--this land,	  Lo, body and soul--this land,	  Lo, body and soul--this land,	  Lo, body and soul--this land,
  My own Manhattan with spires, and the sparkling and hurrying tides,	  My own Manhattan with spires, and the sparkling and hurrying tides,	  My own Manhattan with spires, and the sparkling and hurrying tides,	  My own Manhattan with spires, and the sparkling and hurrying tides,
      and the ships,	      and the ships,	      and the ships,	      and the ships,
  The varied and ample land, the South and the North in the light,	  The varied and ample land, the South and the North in the light,	  The varied and ample land, the South and the North in the light,	  The varied and ample land, the South and the North in the light,
      Ohio's shores and flashing Missouri,	      Ohio's shores and flashing Missouri,	      Ohio's shores and flashing Missouri,	      Ohio's shores and flashing Missouri,
  And ever the far-spreading prairies cover'd with grass and corn.	  And ever the far-spreading prairies cover'd with grass and corn.	  And ever the far-spreading prairies cover'd with grass and corn.	  And ever the far-spreading prairies cover'd with grass and corn.
			
  Lo, the most excellent sun so calm and haughty,	  Lo, the most excellent sun so calm and haughty,	  Lo, the most excellent sun so calm and haughty,	  Lo, the most excellent sun so calm and haughty,
  The violet and purple morn with just-felt breezes,	  The violet and purple morn with just-felt breezes,	  The violet and purple morn with just-felt breezes,	  The violet and purple morn with just-felt breezes,
  The gentle soft-born measureless light,	  The gentle soft-born measureless light,	  The gentle soft-born measureless light,	  The gentle soft-born measureless light,
  The miracle spreading bathing all, the fulfill'd noon,	  The miracle spreading bathing all, the fulfill'd noon,	  The miracle spreading bathing all, the fulfill'd noon,	  The miracle spreading bathing all, the fulfill'd noon,
  The coming eve delicious, the welcome night and the stars,	  The coming eve delicious, the welcome night and the stars,	  The coming eve delicious, the welcome night and the stars,	  The coming eve delicious, the welcome night and the stars,
  Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land.	  Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land.	  Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land.	  Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land.
			
       13	       13	       13	       13
  Sing on, sing on you gray-brown bird,	  Sing on, sing on you gray-brown bird,	  Sing on, sing on you gray-brown bird,	  Sing on, sing on you gray-brown bird,
  Sing from the swamps, the recesses, pour your chant from the bushes,	  Sing from the swamps, the recesses, pour your chant from the bushes,	  Sing from the swamps, the recesses, pour your chant from the bushes,	  Sing from the swamps, the recesses, pour your chant from the bushes,
  Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines.	  Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines.	  Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines.	  Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines.
			
  Sing on dearest brother, warble your reedy song,	  Sing on dearest brother, warble your reedy song,	  Sing on dearest brother, warble your reedy song,	  Sing on dearest brother, warble your reedy song,
  Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe.	  Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe.	  Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe.	  Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe.
			
  O liquid and free and tender!	  O liquid and free and tender!	  O liquid and free and tender!	  O liquid and free and tender!
  O wild and loose to my soul--O wondrous singer!	  O wild and loose to my soul--O wondrous singer!	  O wild and loose to my soul--O wondrous singer!	  O wild and loose to my soul--O wondrous singer!
  You only I hear--yet the star holds me, (but will soon depart,)	  You only I hear--yet the star holds me, (but will soon depart,)	  You only I hear--yet the star holds me, (but will soon depart,)	  You only I hear--yet the star holds me, (but will soon depart,)
  Yet the lilac with mastering odor holds me.	  Yet the lilac with mastering odor holds me.	  Yet the lilac with mastering odor holds me.	  Yet the lilac with mastering odor holds me.
			
       14	       14	       14	       14
  Now while I sat in the day and look'd forth,	  Now while I sat in the day and look'd forth,	  Now while I sat in the day and look'd forth,	  Now while I sat in the day and look'd forth,
  In the close of the day with its light and the fields of spring, and	  In the close of the day with its light and the fields of spring, and	  In the close of the day with its light and the fields of spring, and	  In the close of the day with its light and the fields of spring, and
      the farmers preparing their crops,	      the farmers preparing their crops,	      the farmers preparing their crops,	      the farmers preparing their crops,
  In the large unconscious scenery of my land with its lakes and forests,	  In the large unconscious scenery of my land with its lakes and forests,	  In the large unconscious scenery of my land with its lakes and forests,	  In the large unconscious scenery of my land with its lakes and forests,
  In the heavenly aerial beauty, (after the perturb'd winds and the storms,)	  In the heavenly aerial beauty, (after the perturb'd winds and the storms,)	  In the heavenly aerial beauty, (after the perturb'd winds and the storms,)	  In the heavenly aerial beauty, (after the perturb'd winds and the storms,)
  Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing, and the	  Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing, and the	  Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing, and the	  Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing, and the
      voices of children and women,	      voices of children and women,	      voices of children and women,	      voices of children and women,
  The many-moving sea-tides, and I saw the ships how they sail'd,	  The many-moving sea-tides, and I saw the ships how they sail'd,	  The many-moving sea-tides, and I saw the ships how they sail'd,	  The many-moving sea-tides, and I saw the ships how they sail'd,
  And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields all busy	  And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields all busy	  And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields all busy	  And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields all busy
      with labor,	      with labor,	      with labor,	      with labor,
  And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each with	  And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each with	  And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each with	  And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each with
      its meals and minutia of daily usages,	      its meals and minutia of daily usages,	      its meals and minutia of daily usages,	      its meals and minutia of daily usages,
  And the streets how their throbbings throbb'd, and the cities pent--	  And the streets how their throbbings throbb'd, and the cities pent--	  And the streets how their throbbings throbb'd, and the cities pent--	  And the streets how their throbbings throbb'd, and the cities pent--
      lo, then and there,	      lo, then and there,	      lo, then and there,	      lo, then and there,
  Falling upon them all and among them all, enveloping me with the rest,	  Falling upon them all and among them all, enveloping me with the rest,	  Falling upon them all and among them all, enveloping me with the rest,	  Falling upon them all and among them all, enveloping me with the rest,
  Appear'd the cloud, appear'd the long black trail,	  Appear'd the cloud, appear'd the long black trail,	  Appear'd the cloud, appear'd the long black trail,	  Appear'd the cloud, appear'd the long black trail,
  And I knew death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge of death.	  And I knew death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge of death.	  And I knew death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge of death.	  And I knew death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge of death.
			
  Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of me,	  Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of me,	  Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of me,	  Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of me,
  And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me,	  And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me,	  And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me,	  And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me,
  And I in the middle as with companions, and as holding the hands of	  And I in the middle as with companions, and as holding the hands of	  And I in the middle as with companions, and as holding the hands of	  And I in the middle as with companions, and as holding the hands of
      companions,	      companions,	      companions,	      companions,
  I fled forth to the hiding receiving night that talks not,	  I fled forth to the hiding receiving night that talks not,	  I fled forth to the hiding receiving night that talks not,	  I fled forth to the hiding receiving night that talks not,
  Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in the dimness,	  Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in the dimness,	  Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in the dimness,	  Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in the dimness,
  To the solemn shadowy cedars and ghostly pines so still.	  To the solemn shadowy cedars and ghostly pines so still.	  To the solemn shadowy cedars and ghostly pines so still.	  To the solemn shadowy cedars and ghostly pines so still.
			
  And the singer so shy to the rest receiv'd me,	  And the singer so shy to the rest receiv'd me,	  And the singer so shy to the rest receiv'd me,	  And the singer so shy to the rest receiv'd me,
  The gray-brown bird I know receiv'd us comrades three,	  The gray-brown bird I know receiv'd us comrades three,	  The gray-brown bird I know receiv'd us comrades three,	  The gray-brown bird I know receiv'd us comrades three,
  And he sang the carol of death, and a verse for him I love.	  And he sang the carol of death, and a verse for him I love.	  And he sang the carol of death, and a verse for him I love.	  And he sang the carol of death, and a verse for him I love.
			
  From deep secluded recesses,	  From deep secluded recesses,	  From deep secluded recesses,	  From deep secluded recesses,
  From the fragrant cedars and the ghostly pines so still,	  From the fragrant cedars and the ghostly pines so still,	  From the fragrant cedars and the ghostly pines so still,	  From the fragrant cedars and the ghostly pines so still,
  Came the carol of the bird.	  Came the carol of the bird.	  Came the carol of the bird.	  Came the carol of the bird.
			
  And the charm of the carol rapt me,	  And the charm of the carol rapt me,	  And the charm of the carol rapt me,	  And the charm of the carol rapt me,
  As I held as if by their hands my comrades in the night,	  As I held as if by their hands my comrades in the night,	  As I held as if by their hands my comrades in the night,	  As I held as if by their hands my comrades in the night,
  And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird.	  And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird.	  And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird.	  And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird.
			
  Come lovely and soothing death,	  Come lovely and soothing death,	  Come lovely and soothing death,	  Come lovely and soothing death,
  Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving,	  Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving,	  Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving,	  Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving,
  In the day, in the night, to all, to each,	  In the day, in the night, to all, to each,	  In the day, in the night, to all, to each,	  In the day, in the night, to all, to each,
  Sooner or later delicate death.	  Sooner or later delicate death.	  Sooner or later delicate death.	  Sooner or later delicate death.
			
  Prais'd be the fathomless universe,	  Prais'd be the fathomless universe,	  Prais'd be the fathomless universe,	  Prais'd be the fathomless universe,
  For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious,	  For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious,	  For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious,	  For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious,
  And for love, sweet love--but praise! praise! praise!	  And for love, sweet love--but praise! praise! praise!	  And for love, sweet love--but praise! praise! praise!	  And for love, sweet love--but praise! praise! praise!
  For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death.	  For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death.	  For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death.	  For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death.
			
  Dark mother always gliding near with soft feet,	  Dark mother always gliding near with soft feet,	  Dark mother always gliding near with soft feet,	  Dark mother always gliding near with soft feet,
  Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome?	  Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome?	  Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome?	  Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome?
  Then I chant it for thee, I glorify thee above all,	  Then I chant it for thee, I glorify thee above all,	  Then I chant it for thee, I glorify thee above all,	  Then I chant it for thee, I glorify thee above all,
  I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come unfalteringly.	  I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come unfalteringly.	  I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come unfalteringly.	  I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come unfalteringly.
			
  Approach strong deliveress,	  Approach strong deliveress,	  Approach strong deliveress,	  Approach strong deliveress,
  When it is so, when thou hast taken them I joyously sing the dead,	  When it is so, when thou hast taken them I joyously sing the dead,	  When it is so, when thou hast taken them I joyously sing the dead,	  When it is so, when thou hast taken them I joyously sing the dead,
  Lost in the loving floating ocean of thee,	  Lost in the loving floating ocean of thee,	  Lost in the loving floating ocean of thee,	  Lost in the loving floating ocean of thee,
  Laved in the flood of thy bliss O death.	  Laved in the flood of thy bliss O death.	  Laved in the flood of thy bliss O death.	  Laved in the flood of thy bliss O death.
			
  From me to thee glad serenades,	  From me to thee glad serenades,	  From me to thee glad serenades,	  From me to thee glad serenades,
  Dances for thee I propose saluting thee, adornments and feastings for thee,	  Dances for thee I propose saluting thee, adornments and feastings for thee,	  Dances for thee I propose saluting thee, adornments and feastings for thee,	  Dances for thee I propose saluting thee, adornments and feastings for thee,
  And the sights of the open landscape and the high-spread shy are fitting,	  And the sights of the open landscape and the high-spread shy are fitting,	  And the sights of the open landscape and the high-spread shy are fitting,	  And the sights of the open landscape and the high-spread shy are fitting,
  And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night.	  And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night.	  And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night.	  And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night.
			
  The night in silence under many a star,	  The night in silence under many a star,	  The night in silence under many a star,	  The night in silence under many a star,
  The ocean shore and the husky whispering wave whose voice I know,	  The ocean shore and the husky whispering wave whose voice I know,	  The ocean shore and the husky whispering wave whose voice I know,	  The ocean shore and the husky whispering wave whose voice I know,
  And the soul turning to thee O vast and well-veil'd death,	  And the soul turning to thee O vast and well-veil'd death,	  And the soul turning to thee O vast and well-veil'd death,	  And the soul turning to thee O vast and well-veil'd death,
  And the body gratefully nestling close to thee.	  And the body gratefully nestling close to thee.	  And the body gratefully nestling close to thee.	  And the body gratefully nestling close to thee.
			
  Over the tree-tops I float thee a song,	  Over the tree-tops I float thee a song,	  Over the tree-tops I float thee a song,	  Over the tree-tops I float thee a song,
  Over the rising and sinking waves, over the myriad fields and the	  Over the rising and sinking waves, over the myriad fields and the	  Over the rising and sinking waves, over the myriad fields and the	  Over the rising and sinking waves, over the myriad fields and the
      prairies wide,	      prairies wide,	      prairies wide,	      prairies wide,
  Over the dense-pack'd cities all and the teeming wharves and ways,	  Over the dense-pack'd cities all and the teeming wharves and ways,	  Over the dense-pack'd cities all and the teeming wharves and ways,	  Over the dense-pack'd cities all and the teeming wharves and ways,
  I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee O death.	  I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee O death.	  I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee O death.	  I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee O death.
			
       15	       15	       15	       15
  To the tally of my soul,	  To the tally of my soul,	  To the tally of my soul,	  To the tally of my soul,
  Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird,	  Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird,	  Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird,	  Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird,
  With pure deliberate notes spreading filling the night.	  With pure deliberate notes spreading filling the night.	  With pure deliberate notes spreading filling the night.	  With pure deliberate notes spreading filling the night.
			
  Loud in the pines and cedars dim,	  Loud in the pines and cedars dim,	  Loud in the pines and cedars dim,	  Loud in the pines and cedars dim,
  Clear in the freshness moist and the swamp-perfume,	  Clear in the freshness moist and the swamp-perfume,	  Clear in the freshness moist and the swamp-perfume,	  Clear in the freshness moist and the swamp-perfume,
  And I with my comrades there in the night.	  And I with my comrades there in the night.	  And I with my comrades there in the night.	  And I with my comrades there in the night.
			
  While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed,	  While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed,	  While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed,	  While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed,
  As to long panoramas of visions.	  As to long panoramas of visions.	  As to long panoramas of visions.	  As to long panoramas of visions.
			
  And I saw askant the armies,	  And I saw askant the armies,	  And I saw askant the armies,	  And I saw askant the armies,
  I saw as in noiseless dreams hundreds of battle-flags,	  I saw as in noiseless dreams hundreds of battle-flags,	  I saw as in noiseless dreams hundreds of battle-flags,	  I saw as in noiseless dreams hundreds of battle-flags,
  Borne through the smoke of the battles and pierc'd with missiles I saw them,	  Borne through the smoke of the battles and pierc'd with missiles I saw them,	  Borne through the smoke of the battles and pierc'd with missiles I saw them,	  Borne through the smoke of the battles and pierc'd with missiles I saw them,
  And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn and bloody,	  And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn and bloody,	  And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn and bloody,	  And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn and bloody,
  And at last but a few shreds left on the staffs, (and all in silence,)	  And at last but a few shreds left on the staffs, (and all in silence,)	  And at last but a few shreds left on the staffs, (and all in silence,)	  And at last but a few shreds left on the staffs, (and all in silence,)
  And the staffs all splinter'd and broken.	  And the staffs all splinter'd and broken.	  And the staffs all splinter'd and broken.	  And the staffs all splinter'd and broken.
			
  I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them,	  I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them,	  I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them,	  I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them,
  And the white skeletons of young men, I saw them,	  And the white skeletons of young men, I saw them,	  And the white skeletons of young men, I saw them,	  And the white skeletons of young men, I saw them,
  I saw the debris and debris of all the slain soldiers of the war,	  I saw the debris and debris of all the slain soldiers of the war,	  I saw the debris and debris of all the slain soldiers of the war,	  I saw the debris and debris of all the slain soldiers of the war,
  But I saw they were not as was thought,	  But I saw they were not as was thought,	  But I saw they were not as was thought,	  But I saw they were not as was thought,
  They themselves were fully at rest, they suffer'd not,	  They themselves were fully at rest, they suffer'd not,	  They themselves were fully at rest, they suffer'd not,	  They themselves were fully at rest, they suffer'd not,
  The living remain'd and suffer'd, the mother suffer'd,	  The living remain'd and suffer'd, the mother suffer'd,	  The living remain'd and suffer'd, the mother suffer'd,	  The living remain'd and suffer'd, the mother suffer'd,
  And the wife and the child and the musing comrade suffer'd,	  And the wife and the child and the musing comrade suffer'd,	  And the wife and the child and the musing comrade suffer'd,	  And the wife and the child and the musing comrade suffer'd,
  And the armies that remain'd suffer'd.	  And the armies that remain'd suffer'd.	  And the armies that remain'd suffer'd.	  And the armies that remain'd suffer'd.
			
       16	       16	       16	       16
  Passing the visions, passing the night,	  Passing the visions, passing the night,	  Passing the visions, passing the night,	  Passing the visions, passing the night,
  Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades' hands,	  Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades' hands,	  Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades' hands,	  Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades' hands,
  Passing the song of the hermit bird and the tallying song of my soul,	  Passing the song of the hermit bird and the tallying song of my soul,	  Passing the song of the hermit bird and the tallying song of my soul,	  Passing the song of the hermit bird and the tallying song of my soul,
  Victorious song, death's outlet song, yet varying ever-altering song,	  Victorious song, death's outlet song, yet varying ever-altering song,	  Victorious song, death's outlet song, yet varying ever-altering song,	  Victorious song, death's outlet song, yet varying ever-altering song,
  As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling,	  As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling,	  As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling,	  As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling,
      flooding the night,	      flooding the night,	      flooding the night,	      flooding the night,
  Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and yet again	  Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and yet again	  Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and yet again	  Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and yet again
      bursting with joy,	      bursting with joy,	      bursting with joy,	      bursting with joy,
  Covering the earth and filling the spread of the heaven,	  Covering the earth and filling the spread of the heaven,	  Covering the earth and filling the spread of the heaven,	  Covering the earth and filling the spread of the heaven,
  As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses,	  As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses,	  As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses,	  As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses,
  Passing, I leave thee lilac with heart-shaped leaves,	  Passing, I leave thee lilac with heart-shaped leaves,	  Passing, I leave thee lilac with heart-shaped leaves,	  Passing, I leave thee lilac with heart-shaped leaves,
  I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, returning with spring.	  I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, returning with spring.	  I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, returning with spring.	  I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, returning with spring.
			
  I cease from my song for thee,	  I cease from my song for thee,	  I cease from my song for thee,	  I cease from my song for thee,
  From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, communing with thee,	  From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, communing with thee,	  From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, communing with thee,	  From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, communing with thee,
  O comrade lustrous with silver face in the night.	  O comrade lustrous with silver face in the night.	  O comrade lustrous with silver face in the night.	  O comrade lustrous with silver face in the night.
			
  Yet each to keep and all, retrievements out of the night,	  Yet each to keep and all, retrievements out of the night,	  Yet each to keep and all, retrievements out of the night,	  Yet each to keep and all, retrievements out of the night,
  The song, the wondrous chant of the gray-brown bird,	  The song, the wondrous chant of the gray-brown bird,	  The song, the wondrous chant of the gray-brown bird,	  The song, the wondrous chant of the gray-brown bird,
  And the tallying chant, the echo arous'd in my soul,	  And the tallying chant, the echo arous'd in my soul,	  And the tallying chant, the echo arous'd in my soul,	  And the tallying chant, the echo arous'd in my soul,
  With the lustrous and drooping star with the countenance full of woe,	  With the lustrous and drooping star with the countenance full of woe,	  With the lustrous and drooping star with the countenance full of woe,	  With the lustrous and drooping star with the countenance full of woe,
  With the holders holding my hand nearing the call of the bird,	  With the holders holding my hand nearing the call of the bird,	  With the holders holding my hand nearing the call of the bird,	  With the holders holding my hand nearing the call of the bird,
  Comrades mine and I in the midst, and their memory ever to keep, for	  Comrades mine and I in the midst, and their memory ever to keep, for	  Comrades mine and I in the midst, and their memory ever to keep, for	  Comrades mine and I in the midst, and their memory ever to keep, for
      the dead I loved so well,	      the dead I loved so well,	      the dead I loved so well,	      the dead I loved so well,
  For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands--and this for	  For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands--and this for	  For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands--and this for	  For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands--and this for
      his dear sake,	      his dear sake,	      his dear sake,	      his dear sake,
  Lilac and star and bird twined with the chant of my soul,	  Lilac and star and bird twined with the chant of my soul,	  Lilac and star and bird twined with the chant of my soul,	  Lilac and star and bird twined with the chant of my soul,
  There in the fragrant pines and the cedars dusk and dim.	  There in the fragrant pines and the cedars dusk and dim.	  There in the fragrant pines and the cedars dusk and dim.	  There in the fragrant pines and the cedars dusk and dim.
			
			
			
			
O Captain! My Captain!	O Captain! My Captain!	O Captain! My Captain!	O Captain! My Captain!
			
  O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done,	  O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done,	  O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done,	  O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done,
  The ship has weather'd every rack, the prize we sought is won,	  The ship has weather'd every rack, the prize we sought is won,	  The ship has weather'd every rack, the prize we sought is won,	  The ship has weather'd every rack, the prize we sought is won,
  The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,	  The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,	  The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,	  The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,
  While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring;	  While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring;	  While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring;	  While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring;
      But O heart! heart! heart!	      But O heart! heart! heart!	      But O heart! heart! heart!	      But O heart! heart! heart!
       O the bleeding drops of red,	       O the bleeding drops of red,	       O the bleeding drops of red,	       O the bleeding drops of red,
         Where on the deck my Captain lies,	         Where on the deck my Captain lies,	         Where on the deck my Captain lies,	         Where on the deck my Captain lies,
           Fallen cold and dead.	           Fallen cold and dead.	           Fallen cold and dead.	           Fallen cold and dead.
			
  O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;	  O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;	  O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;	  O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;
  Rise up--for you the flag is flung--for you the bugle trills,	  Rise up--for you the flag is flung--for you the bugle trills,	  Rise up--for you the flag is flung--for you the bugle trills,	  Rise up--for you the flag is flung--for you the bugle trills,
  For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths--for you the shores a-crowding,	  For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths--for you the shores a-crowding,	  For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths--for you the shores a-crowding,	  For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths--for you the shores a-crowding,
  For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;	  For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;	  For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;	  For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;
      Here Captain! dear father!	      Here Captain! dear father!	      Here Captain! dear father!	      Here Captain! dear father!
       This arm beneath your head!	       This arm beneath your head!	       This arm beneath your head!	       This arm beneath your head!
         It is some dream that on the deck,	         It is some dream that on the deck,	         It is some dream that on the deck,	         It is some dream that on the deck,
           You've fallen cold and dead.	           You've fallen cold and dead.	           You've fallen cold and dead.	           You've fallen cold and dead.
			
  My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,	  My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,	  My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,	  My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still,
  My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,	  My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,	  My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,	  My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will,
  The ship is anchor'd safe and sound, its voyage closed and done,	  The ship is anchor'd safe and sound, its voyage closed and done,	  The ship is anchor'd safe and sound, its voyage closed and done,	  The ship is anchor'd safe and sound, its voyage closed and done,
  From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;	  From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;	  From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;	  From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;
       Exult O shores, and ring O bells!	       Exult O shores, and ring O bells!	       Exult O shores, and ring O bells!	       Exult O shores, and ring O bells!
         But I with mournful tread,	         But I with mournful tread,	         But I with mournful tread,	         But I with mournful tread,
           Walk the deck my Captain lies,	           Walk the deck my Captain lies,	           Walk the deck my Captain lies,	           Walk the deck my Captain lies,
             Fallen cold and dead.	             Fallen cold and dead.	             Fallen cold and dead.	             Fallen cold and dead.
			
			
			
			
Hush'd Be the Camps To-Day [May 4, 1865	Hush'd Be the Camps To-Day [May 4, 1865	Hush'd Be the Camps To-Day [May 4, 1865	Hush'd Be the Camps To-Day [May 4, 1865
			
  Hush'd be the camps to-day,	  Hush'd be the camps to-day,	  Hush'd be the camps to-day,	  Hush'd be the camps to-day,
  And soldiers let us drape our war-worn weapons,	  And soldiers let us drape our war-worn weapons,	  And soldiers let us drape our war-worn weapons,	  And soldiers let us drape our war-worn weapons,
  And each with musing soul retire to celebrate,	  And each with musing soul retire to celebrate,	  And each with musing soul retire to celebrate,	  And each with musing soul retire to celebrate,
  Our dear commander's death.	  Our dear commander's death.	  Our dear commander's death.	  Our dear commander's death.
			
  No more for him life's stormy conflicts,	  No more for him life's stormy conflicts,	  No more for him life's stormy conflicts,	  No more for him life's stormy conflicts,
  Nor victory, nor defeat--no more time's dark events,	  Nor victory, nor defeat--no more time's dark events,	  Nor victory, nor defeat--no more time's dark events,	  Nor victory, nor defeat--no more time's dark events,
  Charging like ceaseless clouds across the sky.	  Charging like ceaseless clouds across the sky.	  Charging like ceaseless clouds across the sky.	  Charging like ceaseless clouds across the sky.
  But sing poet in our name,	  But sing poet in our name,	  But sing poet in our name,	  But sing poet in our name,
			
  Sing of the love we bore him--because you, dweller in camps, know it truly.	  Sing of the love we bore him--because you, dweller in camps, know it truly.	  Sing of the love we bore him--because you, dweller in camps, know it truly.	  Sing of the love we bore him--because you, dweller in camps, know it truly.
			
  As they invault the coffin there,	  As they invault the coffin there,	  As they invault the coffin there,	  As they invault the coffin there,
  Sing--as they close the doors of earth upon him--one verse,	  Sing--as they close the doors of earth upon him--one verse,	  Sing--as they close the doors of earth upon him--one verse,	  Sing--as they close the doors of earth upon him--one verse,
  For the heavy hearts of soldiers.	  For the heavy hearts of soldiers.	  For the heavy hearts of soldiers.	  For the heavy hearts of soldiers.
			
			
			
			
This Dust Was Once the Man	This Dust Was Once the Man	This Dust Was Once the Man	This Dust Was Once the Man
			
  This dust was once the man,	  This dust was once the man,	  This dust was once the man,	  This dust was once the man,
  Gentle, plain, just and resolute, under whose cautious hand,	  Gentle, plain, just and resolute, under whose cautious hand,	  Gentle, plain, just and resolute, under whose cautious hand,	  Gentle, plain, just and resolute, under whose cautious hand,
  Against the foulest crime in history known in any land or age,	  Against the foulest crime in history known in any land or age,	  Against the foulest crime in history known in any land or age,	  Against the foulest crime in history known in any land or age,
  Was saved the Union of these States.	  Was saved the Union of these States.	  Was saved the Union of these States.	  Was saved the Union of these States.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXIII	BOOK XXIII	BOOK XXIII	BOOK XXIII
			
			
By Blue Ontario's Shore	By Blue Ontario's Shore	By Blue Ontario's Shore	By Blue Ontario's Shore
			
  By blue Ontario's shore,	  By blue Ontario's shore,	  By blue Ontario's shore,	  By blue Ontario's shore,
  As I mused of these warlike days and of peace return'd, and the	  As I mused of these warlike days and of peace return'd, and the	  As I mused of these warlike days and of peace return'd, and the	  As I mused of these warlike days and of peace return'd, and the
      dead that return no more,	      dead that return no more,	      dead that return no more,	      dead that return no more,
  A Phantom gigantic superb, with stern visage accosted me,	  A Phantom gigantic superb, with stern visage accosted me,	  A Phantom gigantic superb, with stern visage accosted me,	  A Phantom gigantic superb, with stern visage accosted me,
  Chant me the poem, it said, that comes from the soul of America,	  Chant me the poem, it said, that comes from the soul of America,	  Chant me the poem, it said, that comes from the soul of America,	  Chant me the poem, it said, that comes from the soul of America,
      chant me the carol of victory,	      chant me the carol of victory,	      chant me the carol of victory,	      chant me the carol of victory,
  And strike up the marches of Libertad, marches more powerful yet,	  And strike up the marches of Libertad, marches more powerful yet,	  And strike up the marches of Libertad, marches more powerful yet,	  And strike up the marches of Libertad, marches more powerful yet,
  And sing me before you go the song of the throes of Democracy.	  And sing me before you go the song of the throes of Democracy.	  And sing me before you go the song of the throes of Democracy.	  And sing me before you go the song of the throes of Democracy.
			
  (Democracy, the destin'd conqueror, yet treacherous lip-smiles everywhere,	  (Democracy, the destin'd conqueror, yet treacherous lip-smiles everywhere,	  (Democracy, the destin'd conqueror, yet treacherous lip-smiles everywhere,	  (Democracy, the destin'd conqueror, yet treacherous lip-smiles everywhere,
  And death and infidelity at every step.)	  And death and infidelity at every step.)	  And death and infidelity at every step.)	  And death and infidelity at every step.)
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  A Nation announcing itself,	  A Nation announcing itself,	  A Nation announcing itself,	  A Nation announcing itself,
  I myself make the only growth by which I can be appreciated,	  I myself make the only growth by which I can be appreciated,	  I myself make the only growth by which I can be appreciated,	  I myself make the only growth by which I can be appreciated,
  I reject none, accept all, then reproduce all in my own forms.	  I reject none, accept all, then reproduce all in my own forms.	  I reject none, accept all, then reproduce all in my own forms.	  I reject none, accept all, then reproduce all in my own forms.
			
  A breed whose proof is in time and deeds,	  A breed whose proof is in time and deeds,	  A breed whose proof is in time and deeds,	  A breed whose proof is in time and deeds,
  What we are we are, nativity is answer enough to objections,	  What we are we are, nativity is answer enough to objections,	  What we are we are, nativity is answer enough to objections,	  What we are we are, nativity is answer enough to objections,
  We wield ourselves as a weapon is wielded,	  We wield ourselves as a weapon is wielded,	  We wield ourselves as a weapon is wielded,	  We wield ourselves as a weapon is wielded,
  We are powerful and tremendous in ourselves,	  We are powerful and tremendous in ourselves,	  We are powerful and tremendous in ourselves,	  We are powerful and tremendous in ourselves,
  We are executive in ourselves, we are sufficient in the variety of	  We are executive in ourselves, we are sufficient in the variety of	  We are executive in ourselves, we are sufficient in the variety of	  We are executive in ourselves, we are sufficient in the variety of
      ourselves,	      ourselves,	      ourselves,	      ourselves,
  We are the most beautiful to ourselves and in ourselves,	  We are the most beautiful to ourselves and in ourselves,	  We are the most beautiful to ourselves and in ourselves,	  We are the most beautiful to ourselves and in ourselves,
  We stand self-pois'd in the middle, branching thence over the world,	  We stand self-pois'd in the middle, branching thence over the world,	  We stand self-pois'd in the middle, branching thence over the world,	  We stand self-pois'd in the middle, branching thence over the world,
  From Missouri, Nebraska, or Kansas, laughing attacks to scorn.	  From Missouri, Nebraska, or Kansas, laughing attacks to scorn.	  From Missouri, Nebraska, or Kansas, laughing attacks to scorn.	  From Missouri, Nebraska, or Kansas, laughing attacks to scorn.
			
  Nothing is sinful to us outside of ourselves,	  Nothing is sinful to us outside of ourselves,	  Nothing is sinful to us outside of ourselves,	  Nothing is sinful to us outside of ourselves,
  Whatever appears, whatever does not appear, we are beautiful or	  Whatever appears, whatever does not appear, we are beautiful or	  Whatever appears, whatever does not appear, we are beautiful or	  Whatever appears, whatever does not appear, we are beautiful or
      sinful in ourselves only.	      sinful in ourselves only.	      sinful in ourselves only.	      sinful in ourselves only.
			
  (O Mother--O Sisters dear!	  (O Mother--O Sisters dear!	  (O Mother--O Sisters dear!	  (O Mother--O Sisters dear!
  If we are lost, no victor else has destroy'd us,	  If we are lost, no victor else has destroy'd us,	  If we are lost, no victor else has destroy'd us,	  If we are lost, no victor else has destroy'd us,
  It is by ourselves we go down to eternal night.)	  It is by ourselves we go down to eternal night.)	  It is by ourselves we go down to eternal night.)	  It is by ourselves we go down to eternal night.)
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Have you thought there could be but a single supreme?	  Have you thought there could be but a single supreme?	  Have you thought there could be but a single supreme?	  Have you thought there could be but a single supreme?
  There can be any number of supremes--one does not countervail	  There can be any number of supremes--one does not countervail	  There can be any number of supremes--one does not countervail	  There can be any number of supremes--one does not countervail
      another any more than one eyesight countervails another, or	      another any more than one eyesight countervails another, or	      another any more than one eyesight countervails another, or	      another any more than one eyesight countervails another, or
      one life countervails another.	      one life countervails another.	      one life countervails another.	      one life countervails another.
			
  All is eligible to all,	  All is eligible to all,	  All is eligible to all,	  All is eligible to all,
  All is for individuals, all is for you,	  All is for individuals, all is for you,	  All is for individuals, all is for you,	  All is for individuals, all is for you,
  No condition is prohibited, not God's or any.	  No condition is prohibited, not God's or any.	  No condition is prohibited, not God's or any.	  No condition is prohibited, not God's or any.
			
  All comes by the body, only health puts you rapport with the universe.	  All comes by the body, only health puts you rapport with the universe.	  All comes by the body, only health puts you rapport with the universe.	  All comes by the body, only health puts you rapport with the universe.
			
  Produce great Persons, the rest follows.	  Produce great Persons, the rest follows.	  Produce great Persons, the rest follows.	  Produce great Persons, the rest follows.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Piety and conformity to them that like,	  Piety and conformity to them that like,	  Piety and conformity to them that like,	  Piety and conformity to them that like,
  Peace, obesity, allegiance, to them that like,	  Peace, obesity, allegiance, to them that like,	  Peace, obesity, allegiance, to them that like,	  Peace, obesity, allegiance, to them that like,
  I am he who tauntingly compels men, women, nations,	  I am he who tauntingly compels men, women, nations,	  I am he who tauntingly compels men, women, nations,	  I am he who tauntingly compels men, women, nations,
  Crying, Leap from your seats and contend for your lives!	  Crying, Leap from your seats and contend for your lives!	  Crying, Leap from your seats and contend for your lives!	  Crying, Leap from your seats and contend for your lives!
			
  I am he who walks the States with a barb'd tongue, questioning every	  I am he who walks the States with a barb'd tongue, questioning every	  I am he who walks the States with a barb'd tongue, questioning every	  I am he who walks the States with a barb'd tongue, questioning every
      one I meet,	      one I meet,	      one I meet,	      one I meet,
  Who are you that wanted only to be told what you knew before?	  Who are you that wanted only to be told what you knew before?	  Who are you that wanted only to be told what you knew before?	  Who are you that wanted only to be told what you knew before?
  Who are you that wanted only a book to join you in your nonsense?	  Who are you that wanted only a book to join you in your nonsense?	  Who are you that wanted only a book to join you in your nonsense?	  Who are you that wanted only a book to join you in your nonsense?
			
  (With pangs and cries as thine own O bearer of many children,	  (With pangs and cries as thine own O bearer of many children,	  (With pangs and cries as thine own O bearer of many children,	  (With pangs and cries as thine own O bearer of many children,
  These clamors wild to a race of pride I give.)	  These clamors wild to a race of pride I give.)	  These clamors wild to a race of pride I give.)	  These clamors wild to a race of pride I give.)
			
  O lands, would you be freer than all that has ever been before?	  O lands, would you be freer than all that has ever been before?	  O lands, would you be freer than all that has ever been before?	  O lands, would you be freer than all that has ever been before?
  If you would be freer than all that has been before, come listen to me.	  If you would be freer than all that has been before, come listen to me.	  If you would be freer than all that has been before, come listen to me.	  If you would be freer than all that has been before, come listen to me.
			
  Fear grace, elegance, civilization, delicatesse,	  Fear grace, elegance, civilization, delicatesse,	  Fear grace, elegance, civilization, delicatesse,	  Fear grace, elegance, civilization, delicatesse,
  Fear the mellow sweet, the sucking of honey--juice,	  Fear the mellow sweet, the sucking of honey--juice,	  Fear the mellow sweet, the sucking of honey--juice,	  Fear the mellow sweet, the sucking of honey--juice,
  Beware the advancing mortal ripening of Nature,	  Beware the advancing mortal ripening of Nature,	  Beware the advancing mortal ripening of Nature,	  Beware the advancing mortal ripening of Nature,
  Beware what precedes the decay of the ruggedness of states and men.	  Beware what precedes the decay of the ruggedness of states and men.	  Beware what precedes the decay of the ruggedness of states and men.	  Beware what precedes the decay of the ruggedness of states and men.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Ages, precedents, have long been accumulating undirected materials,	  Ages, precedents, have long been accumulating undirected materials,	  Ages, precedents, have long been accumulating undirected materials,	  Ages, precedents, have long been accumulating undirected materials,
  America brings builders, and brings its own styles.	  America brings builders, and brings its own styles.	  America brings builders, and brings its own styles.	  America brings builders, and brings its own styles.
			
  The immortal poets of Asia and Europe have done their work and	  The immortal poets of Asia and Europe have done their work and	  The immortal poets of Asia and Europe have done their work and	  The immortal poets of Asia and Europe have done their work and
      pass'd to other spheres,	      pass'd to other spheres,	      pass'd to other spheres,	      pass'd to other spheres,
  A work remains, the work of surpassing all they have done.	  A work remains, the work of surpassing all they have done.	  A work remains, the work of surpassing all they have done.	  A work remains, the work of surpassing all they have done.
			
  America, curious toward foreign characters, stands by its own at all	  America, curious toward foreign characters, stands by its own at all	  America, curious toward foreign characters, stands by its own at all	  America, curious toward foreign characters, stands by its own at all
      hazards,	      hazards,	      hazards,	      hazards,
  Stands removed, spacious, composite, sound, initiates the true use	  Stands removed, spacious, composite, sound, initiates the true use	  Stands removed, spacious, composite, sound, initiates the true use	  Stands removed, spacious, composite, sound, initiates the true use
      of precedents,	      of precedents,	      of precedents,	      of precedents,
  Does not repel them or the past or what they have produced under	  Does not repel them or the past or what they have produced under	  Does not repel them or the past or what they have produced under	  Does not repel them or the past or what they have produced under
      their forms,	      their forms,	      their forms,	      their forms,
  Takes the lesson with calmness, perceives the corpse slowly borne	  Takes the lesson with calmness, perceives the corpse slowly borne	  Takes the lesson with calmness, perceives the corpse slowly borne	  Takes the lesson with calmness, perceives the corpse slowly borne
      from the house,	      from the house,	      from the house,	      from the house,
  Perceives that it waits a little while in the door, that it was	  Perceives that it waits a little while in the door, that it was	  Perceives that it waits a little while in the door, that it was	  Perceives that it waits a little while in the door, that it was
      fittest for its days,	      fittest for its days,	      fittest for its days,	      fittest for its days,
  That its life has descended to the stalwart and well-shaped heir who	  That its life has descended to the stalwart and well-shaped heir who	  That its life has descended to the stalwart and well-shaped heir who	  That its life has descended to the stalwart and well-shaped heir who
      approaches,	      approaches,	      approaches,	      approaches,
  And that he shall be fittest for his days.	  And that he shall be fittest for his days.	  And that he shall be fittest for his days.	  And that he shall be fittest for his days.
			
  Any period one nation must lead,	  Any period one nation must lead,	  Any period one nation must lead,	  Any period one nation must lead,
  One land must be the promise and reliance of the future.	  One land must be the promise and reliance of the future.	  One land must be the promise and reliance of the future.	  One land must be the promise and reliance of the future.
			
  These States are the amplest poem,	  These States are the amplest poem,	  These States are the amplest poem,	  These States are the amplest poem,
  Here is not merely a nation but a teeming Nation of nations,	  Here is not merely a nation but a teeming Nation of nations,	  Here is not merely a nation but a teeming Nation of nations,	  Here is not merely a nation but a teeming Nation of nations,
  Here the doings of men correspond with the broadcast doings of the	  Here the doings of men correspond with the broadcast doings of the	  Here the doings of men correspond with the broadcast doings of the	  Here the doings of men correspond with the broadcast doings of the
      day and night,	      day and night,	      day and night,	      day and night,
  Here is what moves in magnificent masses careless of particulars,	  Here is what moves in magnificent masses careless of particulars,	  Here is what moves in magnificent masses careless of particulars,	  Here is what moves in magnificent masses careless of particulars,
  Here are the roughs, beards, friendliness, combativeness, the soul loves,	  Here are the roughs, beards, friendliness, combativeness, the soul loves,	  Here are the roughs, beards, friendliness, combativeness, the soul loves,	  Here are the roughs, beards, friendliness, combativeness, the soul loves,
  Here the flowing trains, here the crowds, equality, diversity, the	  Here the flowing trains, here the crowds, equality, diversity, the	  Here the flowing trains, here the crowds, equality, diversity, the	  Here the flowing trains, here the crowds, equality, diversity, the
      soul loves.	      soul loves.	      soul loves.	      soul loves.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Land of lands and bards to corroborate!	  Land of lands and bards to corroborate!	  Land of lands and bards to corroborate!	  Land of lands and bards to corroborate!
  Of them standing among them, one lifts to the light a west-bred face,	  Of them standing among them, one lifts to the light a west-bred face,	  Of them standing among them, one lifts to the light a west-bred face,	  Of them standing among them, one lifts to the light a west-bred face,
  To him the hereditary countenance bequeath'd both mother's and father's,	  To him the hereditary countenance bequeath'd both mother's and father's,	  To him the hereditary countenance bequeath'd both mother's and father's,	  To him the hereditary countenance bequeath'd both mother's and father's,
  His first parts substances, earth, water, animals, trees,	  His first parts substances, earth, water, animals, trees,	  His first parts substances, earth, water, animals, trees,	  His first parts substances, earth, water, animals, trees,
  Built of the common stock, having room for far and near,	  Built of the common stock, having room for far and near,	  Built of the common stock, having room for far and near,	  Built of the common stock, having room for far and near,
  Used to dispense with other lands, incarnating this land,	  Used to dispense with other lands, incarnating this land,	  Used to dispense with other lands, incarnating this land,	  Used to dispense with other lands, incarnating this land,
  Attracting it body and soul to himself, hanging on its neck with	  Attracting it body and soul to himself, hanging on its neck with	  Attracting it body and soul to himself, hanging on its neck with	  Attracting it body and soul to himself, hanging on its neck with
      incomparable love,	      incomparable love,	      incomparable love,	      incomparable love,
  Plunging his seminal muscle into its merits and demerits,	  Plunging his seminal muscle into its merits and demerits,	  Plunging his seminal muscle into its merits and demerits,	  Plunging his seminal muscle into its merits and demerits,
  Making its cities, beginnings, events, diversities, wars, vocal in him,	  Making its cities, beginnings, events, diversities, wars, vocal in him,	  Making its cities, beginnings, events, diversities, wars, vocal in him,	  Making its cities, beginnings, events, diversities, wars, vocal in him,
  Making its rivers, lakes, bays, embouchure in him,	  Making its rivers, lakes, bays, embouchure in him,	  Making its rivers, lakes, bays, embouchure in him,	  Making its rivers, lakes, bays, embouchure in him,
  Mississippi with yearly freshets and changing chutes, Columbia,	  Mississippi with yearly freshets and changing chutes, Columbia,	  Mississippi with yearly freshets and changing chutes, Columbia,	  Mississippi with yearly freshets and changing chutes, Columbia,
      Niagara, Hudson, spending themselves lovingly in him,	      Niagara, Hudson, spending themselves lovingly in him,	      Niagara, Hudson, spending themselves lovingly in him,	      Niagara, Hudson, spending themselves lovingly in him,
  If the Atlantic coast stretch or the Pacific coast stretch, he	  If the Atlantic coast stretch or the Pacific coast stretch, he	  If the Atlantic coast stretch or the Pacific coast stretch, he	  If the Atlantic coast stretch or the Pacific coast stretch, he
      stretching with them North or South,	      stretching with them North or South,	      stretching with them North or South,	      stretching with them North or South,
  Spanning between them East and West, and touching whatever is between them,	  Spanning between them East and West, and touching whatever is between them,	  Spanning between them East and West, and touching whatever is between them,	  Spanning between them East and West, and touching whatever is between them,
  Growths growing from him to offset the growths of pine, cedar, hemlock,	  Growths growing from him to offset the growths of pine, cedar, hemlock,	  Growths growing from him to offset the growths of pine, cedar, hemlock,	  Growths growing from him to offset the growths of pine, cedar, hemlock,
      live-oak, locust, chestnut, hickory, cottonwood, orange, magnolia,	      live-oak, locust, chestnut, hickory, cottonwood, orange, magnolia,	      live-oak, locust, chestnut, hickory, cottonwood, orange, magnolia,	      live-oak, locust, chestnut, hickory, cottonwood, orange, magnolia,
  Tangles as tangled in him as any canebrake or swamp,	  Tangles as tangled in him as any canebrake or swamp,	  Tangles as tangled in him as any canebrake or swamp,	  Tangles as tangled in him as any canebrake or swamp,
  He likening sides and peaks of mountains, forests coated with	  He likening sides and peaks of mountains, forests coated with	  He likening sides and peaks of mountains, forests coated with	  He likening sides and peaks of mountains, forests coated with
      northern transparent ice,	      northern transparent ice,	      northern transparent ice,	      northern transparent ice,
  Off him pasturage sweet and natural as savanna, upland, prairie,	  Off him pasturage sweet and natural as savanna, upland, prairie,	  Off him pasturage sweet and natural as savanna, upland, prairie,	  Off him pasturage sweet and natural as savanna, upland, prairie,
  Through him flights, whirls, screams, answering those of the	  Through him flights, whirls, screams, answering those of the	  Through him flights, whirls, screams, answering those of the	  Through him flights, whirls, screams, answering those of the
      fish-hawk, mocking-bird, night-heron, and eagle,	      fish-hawk, mocking-bird, night-heron, and eagle,	      fish-hawk, mocking-bird, night-heron, and eagle,	      fish-hawk, mocking-bird, night-heron, and eagle,
  His spirit surrounding his country's spirit, unclosed to good and evil,	  His spirit surrounding his country's spirit, unclosed to good and evil,	  His spirit surrounding his country's spirit, unclosed to good and evil,	  His spirit surrounding his country's spirit, unclosed to good and evil,
  Surrounding the essences of real things, old times and present times,	  Surrounding the essences of real things, old times and present times,	  Surrounding the essences of real things, old times and present times,	  Surrounding the essences of real things, old times and present times,
  Surrounding just found shores, islands, tribes of red aborigines,	  Surrounding just found shores, islands, tribes of red aborigines,	  Surrounding just found shores, islands, tribes of red aborigines,	  Surrounding just found shores, islands, tribes of red aborigines,
  Weather-beaten vessels, landings, settlements, embryo stature and muscle,	  Weather-beaten vessels, landings, settlements, embryo stature and muscle,	  Weather-beaten vessels, landings, settlements, embryo stature and muscle,	  Weather-beaten vessels, landings, settlements, embryo stature and muscle,
  The haughty defiance of the Year One, war, peace, the formation of	  The haughty defiance of the Year One, war, peace, the formation of	  The haughty defiance of the Year One, war, peace, the formation of	  The haughty defiance of the Year One, war, peace, the formation of
      the Constitution,	      the Constitution,	      the Constitution,	      the Constitution,
  The separate States, the simple elastic scheme, the immigrants,	  The separate States, the simple elastic scheme, the immigrants,	  The separate States, the simple elastic scheme, the immigrants,	  The separate States, the simple elastic scheme, the immigrants,
  The Union always swarming with blatherers and always sure and impregnable,	  The Union always swarming with blatherers and always sure and impregnable,	  The Union always swarming with blatherers and always sure and impregnable,	  The Union always swarming with blatherers and always sure and impregnable,
  The unsurvey'd interior, log-houses, clearings, wild animals,	  The unsurvey'd interior, log-houses, clearings, wild animals,	  The unsurvey'd interior, log-houses, clearings, wild animals,	  The unsurvey'd interior, log-houses, clearings, wild animals,
      hunters, trappers,	      hunters, trappers,	      hunters, trappers,	      hunters, trappers,
  Surrounding the multiform agriculture, mines, temperature, the	  Surrounding the multiform agriculture, mines, temperature, the	  Surrounding the multiform agriculture, mines, temperature, the	  Surrounding the multiform agriculture, mines, temperature, the
      gestation of new States,	      gestation of new States,	      gestation of new States,	      gestation of new States,
  Congress convening every Twelfth-month, the members duly coming	  Congress convening every Twelfth-month, the members duly coming	  Congress convening every Twelfth-month, the members duly coming	  Congress convening every Twelfth-month, the members duly coming
      up from the uttermost parts,	      up from the uttermost parts,	      up from the uttermost parts,	      up from the uttermost parts,
  Surrounding the noble character of mechanics and farmers, especially	  Surrounding the noble character of mechanics and farmers, especially	  Surrounding the noble character of mechanics and farmers, especially	  Surrounding the noble character of mechanics and farmers, especially
      the young men,	      the young men,	      the young men,	      the young men,
  Responding their manners, speech, dress, friendships, the gait they	  Responding their manners, speech, dress, friendships, the gait they	  Responding their manners, speech, dress, friendships, the gait they	  Responding their manners, speech, dress, friendships, the gait they
      have of persons who never knew how it felt to stand in the	      have of persons who never knew how it felt to stand in the	      have of persons who never knew how it felt to stand in the	      have of persons who never knew how it felt to stand in the
      presence of superiors,	      presence of superiors,	      presence of superiors,	      presence of superiors,
  The freshness and candor of their physiognomy, the copiousness and	  The freshness and candor of their physiognomy, the copiousness and	  The freshness and candor of their physiognomy, the copiousness and	  The freshness and candor of their physiognomy, the copiousness and
      decision of their phrenology,	      decision of their phrenology,	      decision of their phrenology,	      decision of their phrenology,
  The picturesque looseness of their carriage, their fierceness when wrong'd,	  The picturesque looseness of their carriage, their fierceness when wrong'd,	  The picturesque looseness of their carriage, their fierceness when wrong'd,	  The picturesque looseness of their carriage, their fierceness when wrong'd,
  The fluency of their speech, their delight in music, their curiosity,	  The fluency of their speech, their delight in music, their curiosity,	  The fluency of their speech, their delight in music, their curiosity,	  The fluency of their speech, their delight in music, their curiosity,
      good temper and open-handedness, the whole composite make,	      good temper and open-handedness, the whole composite make,	      good temper and open-handedness, the whole composite make,	      good temper and open-handedness, the whole composite make,
  The prevailing ardor and enterprise, the large amativeness,	  The prevailing ardor and enterprise, the large amativeness,	  The prevailing ardor and enterprise, the large amativeness,	  The prevailing ardor and enterprise, the large amativeness,
  The perfect equality of the female with the male, the fluid movement	  The perfect equality of the female with the male, the fluid movement	  The perfect equality of the female with the male, the fluid movement	  The perfect equality of the female with the male, the fluid movement
      of the population,	      of the population,	      of the population,	      of the population,
  The superior marine, free commerce, fisheries, whaling, gold-digging,	  The superior marine, free commerce, fisheries, whaling, gold-digging,	  The superior marine, free commerce, fisheries, whaling, gold-digging,	  The superior marine, free commerce, fisheries, whaling, gold-digging,
  Wharf-hemm'd cities, railroad and steamboat lines intersecting all points,	  Wharf-hemm'd cities, railroad and steamboat lines intersecting all points,	  Wharf-hemm'd cities, railroad and steamboat lines intersecting all points,	  Wharf-hemm'd cities, railroad and steamboat lines intersecting all points,
  Factories, mercantile life, labor-saving machinery, the Northeast,	  Factories, mercantile life, labor-saving machinery, the Northeast,	  Factories, mercantile life, labor-saving machinery, the Northeast,	  Factories, mercantile life, labor-saving machinery, the Northeast,
      Northwest, Southwest,	      Northwest, Southwest,	      Northwest, Southwest,	      Northwest, Southwest,
  Manhattan firemen, the Yankee swap, southern plantation life,	  Manhattan firemen, the Yankee swap, southern plantation life,	  Manhattan firemen, the Yankee swap, southern plantation life,	  Manhattan firemen, the Yankee swap, southern plantation life,
  Slavery--the murderous, treacherous conspiracy to raise it upon the	  Slavery--the murderous, treacherous conspiracy to raise it upon the	  Slavery--the murderous, treacherous conspiracy to raise it upon the	  Slavery--the murderous, treacherous conspiracy to raise it upon the
      ruins of all the rest,	      ruins of all the rest,	      ruins of all the rest,	      ruins of all the rest,
  On and on to the grapple with it--Assassin! then your life or ours	  On and on to the grapple with it--Assassin! then your life or ours	  On and on to the grapple with it--Assassin! then your life or ours	  On and on to the grapple with it--Assassin! then your life or ours
      be the stake, and respite no more.	      be the stake, and respite no more.	      be the stake, and respite no more.	      be the stake, and respite no more.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  (Lo, high toward heaven, this day,	  (Lo, high toward heaven, this day,	  (Lo, high toward heaven, this day,	  (Lo, high toward heaven, this day,
  Libertad, from the conqueress' field return'd,	  Libertad, from the conqueress' field return'd,	  Libertad, from the conqueress' field return'd,	  Libertad, from the conqueress' field return'd,
  I mark the new aureola around your head,	  I mark the new aureola around your head,	  I mark the new aureola around your head,	  I mark the new aureola around your head,
  No more of soft astral, but dazzling and fierce,	  No more of soft astral, but dazzling and fierce,	  No more of soft astral, but dazzling and fierce,	  No more of soft astral, but dazzling and fierce,
  With war's flames and the lambent lightnings playing,	  With war's flames and the lambent lightnings playing,	  With war's flames and the lambent lightnings playing,	  With war's flames and the lambent lightnings playing,
  And your port immovable where you stand,	  And your port immovable where you stand,	  And your port immovable where you stand,	  And your port immovable where you stand,
  With still the inextinguishable glance and the clinch'd and lifted fist,	  With still the inextinguishable glance and the clinch'd and lifted fist,	  With still the inextinguishable glance and the clinch'd and lifted fist,	  With still the inextinguishable glance and the clinch'd and lifted fist,
  And your foot on the neck of the menacing one, the scorner utterly	  And your foot on the neck of the menacing one, the scorner utterly	  And your foot on the neck of the menacing one, the scorner utterly	  And your foot on the neck of the menacing one, the scorner utterly
      crush'd beneath you,	      crush'd beneath you,	      crush'd beneath you,	      crush'd beneath you,
  The menacing arrogant one that strode and advanced with his	  The menacing arrogant one that strode and advanced with his	  The menacing arrogant one that strode and advanced with his	  The menacing arrogant one that strode and advanced with his
      senseless scorn, bearing the murderous knife,	      senseless scorn, bearing the murderous knife,	      senseless scorn, bearing the murderous knife,	      senseless scorn, bearing the murderous knife,
  The wide-swelling one, the braggart that would yesterday do so much,	  The wide-swelling one, the braggart that would yesterday do so much,	  The wide-swelling one, the braggart that would yesterday do so much,	  The wide-swelling one, the braggart that would yesterday do so much,
  To-day a carrion dead and damn'd, the despised of all the earth,	  To-day a carrion dead and damn'd, the despised of all the earth,	  To-day a carrion dead and damn'd, the despised of all the earth,	  To-day a carrion dead and damn'd, the despised of all the earth,
  An offal rank, to the dunghill maggots spurn'd.)	  An offal rank, to the dunghill maggots spurn'd.)	  An offal rank, to the dunghill maggots spurn'd.)	  An offal rank, to the dunghill maggots spurn'd.)
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  Others take finish, but the Republic is ever constructive and ever	  Others take finish, but the Republic is ever constructive and ever	  Others take finish, but the Republic is ever constructive and ever	  Others take finish, but the Republic is ever constructive and ever
      keeps vista,	      keeps vista,	      keeps vista,	      keeps vista,
  Others adorn the past, but you O days of the present, I adorn you,	  Others adorn the past, but you O days of the present, I adorn you,	  Others adorn the past, but you O days of the present, I adorn you,	  Others adorn the past, but you O days of the present, I adorn you,
  O days of the future I believe in you--I isolate myself for your sake,	  O days of the future I believe in you--I isolate myself for your sake,	  O days of the future I believe in you--I isolate myself for your sake,	  O days of the future I believe in you--I isolate myself for your sake,
  O America because you build for mankind I build for you,	  O America because you build for mankind I build for you,	  O America because you build for mankind I build for you,	  O America because you build for mankind I build for you,
  O well-beloved stone-cutters, I lead them who plan with decision	  O well-beloved stone-cutters, I lead them who plan with decision	  O well-beloved stone-cutters, I lead them who plan with decision	  O well-beloved stone-cutters, I lead them who plan with decision
      and science,	      and science,	      and science,	      and science,
  Lead the present with friendly hand toward the future.	  Lead the present with friendly hand toward the future.	  Lead the present with friendly hand toward the future.	  Lead the present with friendly hand toward the future.
  (Bravas to all impulses sending sane children to the next age!	  (Bravas to all impulses sending sane children to the next age!	  (Bravas to all impulses sending sane children to the next age!	  (Bravas to all impulses sending sane children to the next age!
  But damn that which spends itself with no thought of the stain,	  But damn that which spends itself with no thought of the stain,	  But damn that which spends itself with no thought of the stain,	  But damn that which spends itself with no thought of the stain,
      pains, dismay, feebleness, it is bequeathing.)	      pains, dismay, feebleness, it is bequeathing.)	      pains, dismay, feebleness, it is bequeathing.)	      pains, dismay, feebleness, it is bequeathing.)
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  I listened to the Phantom by Ontario's shore,	  I listened to the Phantom by Ontario's shore,	  I listened to the Phantom by Ontario's shore,	  I listened to the Phantom by Ontario's shore,
  I heard the voice arising demanding bards,	  I heard the voice arising demanding bards,	  I heard the voice arising demanding bards,	  I heard the voice arising demanding bards,
  By them all native and grand, by them alone can these States be	  By them all native and grand, by them alone can these States be	  By them all native and grand, by them alone can these States be	  By them all native and grand, by them alone can these States be
      fused into the compact organism of a Nation.	      fused into the compact organism of a Nation.	      fused into the compact organism of a Nation.	      fused into the compact organism of a Nation.
			
  To hold men together by paper and seal or by compulsion is no account,	  To hold men together by paper and seal or by compulsion is no account,	  To hold men together by paper and seal or by compulsion is no account,	  To hold men together by paper and seal or by compulsion is no account,
  That only holds men together which aggregates all in a living principle,	  That only holds men together which aggregates all in a living principle,	  That only holds men together which aggregates all in a living principle,	  That only holds men together which aggregates all in a living principle,
      as the hold of the limbs of the body or the fibres of plants.	      as the hold of the limbs of the body or the fibres of plants.	      as the hold of the limbs of the body or the fibres of plants.	      as the hold of the limbs of the body or the fibres of plants.
			
  Of all races and eras these States with veins full of poetical stuff most	  Of all races and eras these States with veins full of poetical stuff most	  Of all races and eras these States with veins full of poetical stuff most	  Of all races and eras these States with veins full of poetical stuff most
      need poets, and are to have the greatest, and use them the greatest,	      need poets, and are to have the greatest, and use them the greatest,	      need poets, and are to have the greatest, and use them the greatest,	      need poets, and are to have the greatest, and use them the greatest,
  Their Presidents shall not be their common referee so much as their	  Their Presidents shall not be their common referee so much as their	  Their Presidents shall not be their common referee so much as their	  Their Presidents shall not be their common referee so much as their
      poets shall.	      poets shall.	      poets shall.	      poets shall.
			
  (Soul of love and tongue of fire!	  (Soul of love and tongue of fire!	  (Soul of love and tongue of fire!	  (Soul of love and tongue of fire!
  Eye to pierce the deepest deeps and sweep the world!	  Eye to pierce the deepest deeps and sweep the world!	  Eye to pierce the deepest deeps and sweep the world!	  Eye to pierce the deepest deeps and sweep the world!
  Ah Mother, prolific and full in all besides, yet how long barren, barren?)	  Ah Mother, prolific and full in all besides, yet how long barren, barren?)	  Ah Mother, prolific and full in all besides, yet how long barren, barren?)	  Ah Mother, prolific and full in all besides, yet how long barren, barren?)
			
       10	       10	       10	       10
  Of these States the poet is the equable man,	  Of these States the poet is the equable man,	  Of these States the poet is the equable man,	  Of these States the poet is the equable man,
  Not in him but off from him things are grotesque, eccentric, fail of	  Not in him but off from him things are grotesque, eccentric, fail of	  Not in him but off from him things are grotesque, eccentric, fail of	  Not in him but off from him things are grotesque, eccentric, fail of
      their full returns,	      their full returns,	      their full returns,	      their full returns,
  Nothing out of its place is good, nothing in its place is bad,	  Nothing out of its place is good, nothing in its place is bad,	  Nothing out of its place is good, nothing in its place is bad,	  Nothing out of its place is good, nothing in its place is bad,
  He bestows on every object or quality its fit proportion, neither	  He bestows on every object or quality its fit proportion, neither	  He bestows on every object or quality its fit proportion, neither	  He bestows on every object or quality its fit proportion, neither
      more nor less,	      more nor less,	      more nor less,	      more nor less,
  He is the arbiter of the diverse, he is the key,	  He is the arbiter of the diverse, he is the key,	  He is the arbiter of the diverse, he is the key,	  He is the arbiter of the diverse, he is the key,
  He is the equalizer of his age and land,	  He is the equalizer of his age and land,	  He is the equalizer of his age and land,	  He is the equalizer of his age and land,
  He supplies what wants supplying, he checks what wants checking,	  He supplies what wants supplying, he checks what wants checking,	  He supplies what wants supplying, he checks what wants checking,	  He supplies what wants supplying, he checks what wants checking,
  In peace out of him speaks the spirit of peace, large, rich,	  In peace out of him speaks the spirit of peace, large, rich,	  In peace out of him speaks the spirit of peace, large, rich,	  In peace out of him speaks the spirit of peace, large, rich,
      thrifty, building populous towns, encouraging agriculture, arts,	      thrifty, building populous towns, encouraging agriculture, arts,	      thrifty, building populous towns, encouraging agriculture, arts,	      thrifty, building populous towns, encouraging agriculture, arts,
      commerce, lighting the study of man, the soul, health,	      commerce, lighting the study of man, the soul, health,	      commerce, lighting the study of man, the soul, health,	      commerce, lighting the study of man, the soul, health,
      immortality, government,	      immortality, government,	      immortality, government,	      immortality, government,
  In war he is the best backer of the war, he fetches artillery as	  In war he is the best backer of the war, he fetches artillery as	  In war he is the best backer of the war, he fetches artillery as	  In war he is the best backer of the war, he fetches artillery as
      good as the engineer's, he can make every word he speaks draw blood,	      good as the engineer's, he can make every word he speaks draw blood,	      good as the engineer's, he can make every word he speaks draw blood,	      good as the engineer's, he can make every word he speaks draw blood,
  The years straying toward infidelity he withholds by his steady faith,	  The years straying toward infidelity he withholds by his steady faith,	  The years straying toward infidelity he withholds by his steady faith,	  The years straying toward infidelity he withholds by his steady faith,
  He is no arguer, he is judgment, (Nature accepts him absolutely,)	  He is no arguer, he is judgment, (Nature accepts him absolutely,)	  He is no arguer, he is judgment, (Nature accepts him absolutely,)	  He is no arguer, he is judgment, (Nature accepts him absolutely,)
  He judges not as the judge judges but as the sun failing round	  He judges not as the judge judges but as the sun failing round	  He judges not as the judge judges but as the sun failing round	  He judges not as the judge judges but as the sun failing round
      helpless thing,	      helpless thing,	      helpless thing,	      helpless thing,
  As he sees the farthest he has the most faith,	  As he sees the farthest he has the most faith,	  As he sees the farthest he has the most faith,	  As he sees the farthest he has the most faith,
  His thoughts are the hymns of the praise of things,	  His thoughts are the hymns of the praise of things,	  His thoughts are the hymns of the praise of things,	  His thoughts are the hymns of the praise of things,
  In the dispute on God and eternity he is silent,	  In the dispute on God and eternity he is silent,	  In the dispute on God and eternity he is silent,	  In the dispute on God and eternity he is silent,
  He sees eternity less like a play with a prologue and denouement,	  He sees eternity less like a play with a prologue and denouement,	  He sees eternity less like a play with a prologue and denouement,	  He sees eternity less like a play with a prologue and denouement,
  He sees eternity in men and women, he does not see men and women	  He sees eternity in men and women, he does not see men and women	  He sees eternity in men and women, he does not see men and women	  He sees eternity in men and women, he does not see men and women
      as dreams or dots.	      as dreams or dots.	      as dreams or dots.	      as dreams or dots.
			
  For the great Idea, the idea of perfect and free individuals,	  For the great Idea, the idea of perfect and free individuals,	  For the great Idea, the idea of perfect and free individuals,	  For the great Idea, the idea of perfect and free individuals,
  For that, the bard walks in advance, leader of leaders,	  For that, the bard walks in advance, leader of leaders,	  For that, the bard walks in advance, leader of leaders,	  For that, the bard walks in advance, leader of leaders,
  The attitude of him cheers up slaves and horrifies foreign despots.	  The attitude of him cheers up slaves and horrifies foreign despots.	  The attitude of him cheers up slaves and horrifies foreign despots.	  The attitude of him cheers up slaves and horrifies foreign despots.
			
  Without extinction is Liberty, without retrograde is Equality,	  Without extinction is Liberty, without retrograde is Equality,	  Without extinction is Liberty, without retrograde is Equality,	  Without extinction is Liberty, without retrograde is Equality,
  They live in the feelings of young men and the best women,	  They live in the feelings of young men and the best women,	  They live in the feelings of young men and the best women,	  They live in the feelings of young men and the best women,
  (Not for nothing have the indomitable heads of the earth been always	  (Not for nothing have the indomitable heads of the earth been always	  (Not for nothing have the indomitable heads of the earth been always	  (Not for nothing have the indomitable heads of the earth been always
      ready to fall for Liberty.)	      ready to fall for Liberty.)	      ready to fall for Liberty.)	      ready to fall for Liberty.)
			
       11	       11	       11	       11
  For the great Idea,	  For the great Idea,	  For the great Idea,	  For the great Idea,
  That, O my brethren, that is the mission of poets.	  That, O my brethren, that is the mission of poets.	  That, O my brethren, that is the mission of poets.	  That, O my brethren, that is the mission of poets.
			
  Songs of stern defiance ever ready,	  Songs of stern defiance ever ready,	  Songs of stern defiance ever ready,	  Songs of stern defiance ever ready,
  Songs of the rapid arming and the march,	  Songs of the rapid arming and the march,	  Songs of the rapid arming and the march,	  Songs of the rapid arming and the march,
  The flag of peace quick-folded, and instead the flag we know,	  The flag of peace quick-folded, and instead the flag we know,	  The flag of peace quick-folded, and instead the flag we know,	  The flag of peace quick-folded, and instead the flag we know,
  Warlike flag of the great Idea.	  Warlike flag of the great Idea.	  Warlike flag of the great Idea.	  Warlike flag of the great Idea.
			
  (Angry cloth I saw there leaping!	  (Angry cloth I saw there leaping!	  (Angry cloth I saw there leaping!	  (Angry cloth I saw there leaping!
  I stand again in leaden rain your flapping folds saluting,	  I stand again in leaden rain your flapping folds saluting,	  I stand again in leaden rain your flapping folds saluting,	  I stand again in leaden rain your flapping folds saluting,
  I sing you over all, flying beckoning through the fight--O the	  I sing you over all, flying beckoning through the fight--O the	  I sing you over all, flying beckoning through the fight--O the	  I sing you over all, flying beckoning through the fight--O the
      hard-contested fight!	      hard-contested fight!	      hard-contested fight!	      hard-contested fight!
  The cannons ope their rosy-flashing muzzles--the hurtled balls scream,	  The cannons ope their rosy-flashing muzzles--the hurtled balls scream,	  The cannons ope their rosy-flashing muzzles--the hurtled balls scream,	  The cannons ope their rosy-flashing muzzles--the hurtled balls scream,
  The battle-front forms amid the smoke--the volleys pour incessant	  The battle-front forms amid the smoke--the volleys pour incessant	  The battle-front forms amid the smoke--the volleys pour incessant	  The battle-front forms amid the smoke--the volleys pour incessant
      from the line,	      from the line,	      from the line,	      from the line,
  Hark, the ringing word Charge!--now the tussle and the furious	  Hark, the ringing word Charge!--now the tussle and the furious	  Hark, the ringing word Charge!--now the tussle and the furious	  Hark, the ringing word Charge!--now the tussle and the furious
      maddening yells,	      maddening yells,	      maddening yells,	      maddening yells,
  Now the corpses tumble curl'd upon the ground,	  Now the corpses tumble curl'd upon the ground,	  Now the corpses tumble curl'd upon the ground,	  Now the corpses tumble curl'd upon the ground,
  Cold, cold in death, for precious life of you,	  Cold, cold in death, for precious life of you,	  Cold, cold in death, for precious life of you,	  Cold, cold in death, for precious life of you,
  Angry cloth I saw there leaping.)	  Angry cloth I saw there leaping.)	  Angry cloth I saw there leaping.)	  Angry cloth I saw there leaping.)
			
       12	       12	       12	       12
  Are you he who would assume a place to teach or be a poet here in	  Are you he who would assume a place to teach or be a poet here in	  Are you he who would assume a place to teach or be a poet here in	  Are you he who would assume a place to teach or be a poet here in
      the States?	      the States?	      the States?	      the States?
  The place is august, the terms obdurate.	  The place is august, the terms obdurate.	  The place is august, the terms obdurate.	  The place is august, the terms obdurate.
			
  Who would assume to teach here may well prepare himself body and mind,	  Who would assume to teach here may well prepare himself body and mind,	  Who would assume to teach here may well prepare himself body and mind,	  Who would assume to teach here may well prepare himself body and mind,
  He may well survey, ponder, arm, fortify, harden, make lithe himself,	  He may well survey, ponder, arm, fortify, harden, make lithe himself,	  He may well survey, ponder, arm, fortify, harden, make lithe himself,	  He may well survey, ponder, arm, fortify, harden, make lithe himself,
  He shall surely be question'd beforehand by me with many and stern questions.	  He shall surely be question'd beforehand by me with many and stern questions.	  He shall surely be question'd beforehand by me with many and stern questions.	  He shall surely be question'd beforehand by me with many and stern questions.
			
  Who are you indeed who would talk or sing to America?	  Who are you indeed who would talk or sing to America?	  Who are you indeed who would talk or sing to America?	  Who are you indeed who would talk or sing to America?
  Have you studied out the land, its idioms and men?	  Have you studied out the land, its idioms and men?	  Have you studied out the land, its idioms and men?	  Have you studied out the land, its idioms and men?
  Have you learn'd the physiology, phrenology, politics, geography,	  Have you learn'd the physiology, phrenology, politics, geography,	  Have you learn'd the physiology, phrenology, politics, geography,	  Have you learn'd the physiology, phrenology, politics, geography,
      pride, freedom, friendship of the land? its substratums and objects?	      pride, freedom, friendship of the land? its substratums and objects?	      pride, freedom, friendship of the land? its substratums and objects?	      pride, freedom, friendship of the land? its substratums and objects?
  Have you consider'd the organic compact of the first day of the	  Have you consider'd the organic compact of the first day of the	  Have you consider'd the organic compact of the first day of the	  Have you consider'd the organic compact of the first day of the
      first year of Independence, sign'd by the Commissioners, ratified	      first year of Independence, sign'd by the Commissioners, ratified	      first year of Independence, sign'd by the Commissioners, ratified	      first year of Independence, sign'd by the Commissioners, ratified
      by the States, and read by Washington at the head of the army?	      by the States, and read by Washington at the head of the army?	      by the States, and read by Washington at the head of the army?	      by the States, and read by Washington at the head of the army?
  Have you possess'd yourself of the Federal Constitution?	  Have you possess'd yourself of the Federal Constitution?	  Have you possess'd yourself of the Federal Constitution?	  Have you possess'd yourself of the Federal Constitution?
  Do you see who have left all feudal processes and poems behind them,	  Do you see who have left all feudal processes and poems behind them,	  Do you see who have left all feudal processes and poems behind them,	  Do you see who have left all feudal processes and poems behind them,
      and assumed the poems and processes of Democracy?	      and assumed the poems and processes of Democracy?	      and assumed the poems and processes of Democracy?	      and assumed the poems and processes of Democracy?
  Are you faithful to things? do you teach what the land and sea, the	  Are you faithful to things? do you teach what the land and sea, the	  Are you faithful to things? do you teach what the land and sea, the	  Are you faithful to things? do you teach what the land and sea, the
      bodies of men, womanhood, amativeness, heroic angers, teach?	      bodies of men, womanhood, amativeness, heroic angers, teach?	      bodies of men, womanhood, amativeness, heroic angers, teach?	      bodies of men, womanhood, amativeness, heroic angers, teach?
  Have you sped through fleeting customs, popularities?	  Have you sped through fleeting customs, popularities?	  Have you sped through fleeting customs, popularities?	  Have you sped through fleeting customs, popularities?
  Can you hold your hand against all seductions, follies, whirls,	  Can you hold your hand against all seductions, follies, whirls,	  Can you hold your hand against all seductions, follies, whirls,	  Can you hold your hand against all seductions, follies, whirls,
      fierce contentions? are you very strong? are you really of the	      fierce contentions? are you very strong? are you really of the	      fierce contentions? are you very strong? are you really of the	      fierce contentions? are you very strong? are you really of the
      whole People?	      whole People?	      whole People?	      whole People?
  Are you not of some coterie? some school or mere religion?	  Are you not of some coterie? some school or mere religion?	  Are you not of some coterie? some school or mere religion?	  Are you not of some coterie? some school or mere religion?
  Are you done with reviews and criticisms of life? animating now to	  Are you done with reviews and criticisms of life? animating now to	  Are you done with reviews and criticisms of life? animating now to	  Are you done with reviews and criticisms of life? animating now to
      life itself?	      life itself?	      life itself?	      life itself?
  Have you vivified yourself from the maternity of these States?	  Have you vivified yourself from the maternity of these States?	  Have you vivified yourself from the maternity of these States?	  Have you vivified yourself from the maternity of these States?
  Have you too the old ever-fresh forbearance and impartiality?	  Have you too the old ever-fresh forbearance and impartiality?	  Have you too the old ever-fresh forbearance and impartiality?	  Have you too the old ever-fresh forbearance and impartiality?
  Do you hold the like love for those hardening to maturity? for the	  Do you hold the like love for those hardening to maturity? for the	  Do you hold the like love for those hardening to maturity? for the	  Do you hold the like love for those hardening to maturity? for the
      last-born? little and big? and for the errant?	      last-born? little and big? and for the errant?	      last-born? little and big? and for the errant?	      last-born? little and big? and for the errant?
			
  What is this you bring my America?	  What is this you bring my America?	  What is this you bring my America?	  What is this you bring my America?
  Is it uniform with my country?	  Is it uniform with my country?	  Is it uniform with my country?	  Is it uniform with my country?
  Is it not something that has been better told or done before?	  Is it not something that has been better told or done before?	  Is it not something that has been better told or done before?	  Is it not something that has been better told or done before?
  Have you not imported this or the spirit of it in some ship?	  Have you not imported this or the spirit of it in some ship?	  Have you not imported this or the spirit of it in some ship?	  Have you not imported this or the spirit of it in some ship?
  Is it not a mere tale? a rhyme? a prettiness?--Is the good old cause in it?	  Is it not a mere tale? a rhyme? a prettiness?--Is the good old cause in it?	  Is it not a mere tale? a rhyme? a prettiness?--Is the good old cause in it?	  Is it not a mere tale? a rhyme? a prettiness?--Is the good old cause in it?
  Has it not dangled long at the heels of the poets, politicians,	  Has it not dangled long at the heels of the poets, politicians,	  Has it not dangled long at the heels of the poets, politicians,	  Has it not dangled long at the heels of the poets, politicians,
      literats, of enemies' lands?	      literats, of enemies' lands?	      literats, of enemies' lands?	      literats, of enemies' lands?
  Does it not assume that what is notoriously gone is still here?	  Does it not assume that what is notoriously gone is still here?	  Does it not assume that what is notoriously gone is still here?	  Does it not assume that what is notoriously gone is still here?
  Does it answer universal needs? will it improve manners?	  Does it answer universal needs? will it improve manners?	  Does it answer universal needs? will it improve manners?	  Does it answer universal needs? will it improve manners?
  Does it sound with trumpet-voice the proud victory of the Union in	  Does it sound with trumpet-voice the proud victory of the Union in	  Does it sound with trumpet-voice the proud victory of the Union in	  Does it sound with trumpet-voice the proud victory of the Union in
      that secession war?	      that secession war?	      that secession war?	      that secession war?
  Can your performance face the open fields and the seaside?	  Can your performance face the open fields and the seaside?	  Can your performance face the open fields and the seaside?	  Can your performance face the open fields and the seaside?
  Will it absorb into me as I absorb food, air, to appear again in my	  Will it absorb into me as I absorb food, air, to appear again in my	  Will it absorb into me as I absorb food, air, to appear again in my	  Will it absorb into me as I absorb food, air, to appear again in my
      strength, gait, face?	      strength, gait, face?	      strength, gait, face?	      strength, gait, face?
  Have real employments contributed to it? original makers, not mere	  Have real employments contributed to it? original makers, not mere	  Have real employments contributed to it? original makers, not mere	  Have real employments contributed to it? original makers, not mere
      amanuenses?	      amanuenses?	      amanuenses?	      amanuenses?
  Does it meet modern discoveries, calibres, facts, face to face?	  Does it meet modern discoveries, calibres, facts, face to face?	  Does it meet modern discoveries, calibres, facts, face to face?	  Does it meet modern discoveries, calibres, facts, face to face?
  What does it mean to American persons, progresses, cities? Chicago,	  What does it mean to American persons, progresses, cities? Chicago,	  What does it mean to American persons, progresses, cities? Chicago,	  What does it mean to American persons, progresses, cities? Chicago,
      Kanada, Arkansas?	      Kanada, Arkansas?	      Kanada, Arkansas?	      Kanada, Arkansas?
  Does it see behind the apparent custodians the real custodians	  Does it see behind the apparent custodians the real custodians	  Does it see behind the apparent custodians the real custodians	  Does it see behind the apparent custodians the real custodians
      standing, menacing, silent, the mechanics, Manhattanese, Western	      standing, menacing, silent, the mechanics, Manhattanese, Western	      standing, menacing, silent, the mechanics, Manhattanese, Western	      standing, menacing, silent, the mechanics, Manhattanese, Western
      men, Southerners, significant alike in their apathy, and in the	      men, Southerners, significant alike in their apathy, and in the	      men, Southerners, significant alike in their apathy, and in the	      men, Southerners, significant alike in their apathy, and in the
      promptness of their love?	      promptness of their love?	      promptness of their love?	      promptness of their love?
  Does it see what finally befalls, and has always finally befallen,	  Does it see what finally befalls, and has always finally befallen,	  Does it see what finally befalls, and has always finally befallen,	  Does it see what finally befalls, and has always finally befallen,
      each temporizer, patcher, outsider, partialist, alarmist,	      each temporizer, patcher, outsider, partialist, alarmist,	      each temporizer, patcher, outsider, partialist, alarmist,	      each temporizer, patcher, outsider, partialist, alarmist,
      infidel, who has ever ask'd any thing of America?	      infidel, who has ever ask'd any thing of America?	      infidel, who has ever ask'd any thing of America?	      infidel, who has ever ask'd any thing of America?
  What mocking and scornful negligence?	  What mocking and scornful negligence?	  What mocking and scornful negligence?	  What mocking and scornful negligence?
  The track strew'd with the dust of skeletons,	  The track strew'd with the dust of skeletons,	  The track strew'd with the dust of skeletons,	  The track strew'd with the dust of skeletons,
  By the roadside others disdainfully toss'd.	  By the roadside others disdainfully toss'd.	  By the roadside others disdainfully toss'd.	  By the roadside others disdainfully toss'd.
			
       13	       13	       13	       13
  Rhymes and rhymers pass away, poems distill'd from poems pass away,	  Rhymes and rhymers pass away, poems distill'd from poems pass away,	  Rhymes and rhymers pass away, poems distill'd from poems pass away,	  Rhymes and rhymers pass away, poems distill'd from poems pass away,
  The swarms of reflectors and the polite pass, and leave ashes,	  The swarms of reflectors and the polite pass, and leave ashes,	  The swarms of reflectors and the polite pass, and leave ashes,	  The swarms of reflectors and the polite pass, and leave ashes,
  Admirers, importers, obedient persons, make but the soil of literature,	  Admirers, importers, obedient persons, make but the soil of literature,	  Admirers, importers, obedient persons, make but the soil of literature,	  Admirers, importers, obedient persons, make but the soil of literature,
  America justifies itself, give it time, no disguise can deceive it	  America justifies itself, give it time, no disguise can deceive it	  America justifies itself, give it time, no disguise can deceive it	  America justifies itself, give it time, no disguise can deceive it
      or conceal from it, it is impassive enough,	      or conceal from it, it is impassive enough,	      or conceal from it, it is impassive enough,	      or conceal from it, it is impassive enough,
  Only toward the likes of itself will it advance to meet them,	  Only toward the likes of itself will it advance to meet them,	  Only toward the likes of itself will it advance to meet them,	  Only toward the likes of itself will it advance to meet them,
  If its poets appear it will in due time advance to meet them, there	  If its poets appear it will in due time advance to meet them, there	  If its poets appear it will in due time advance to meet them, there	  If its poets appear it will in due time advance to meet them, there
      is no fear of mistake,	      is no fear of mistake,	      is no fear of mistake,	      is no fear of mistake,
  (The proof of a poet shall be sternly deferr'd till his country	  (The proof of a poet shall be sternly deferr'd till his country	  (The proof of a poet shall be sternly deferr'd till his country	  (The proof of a poet shall be sternly deferr'd till his country
      absorbs him as affectionately as he has absorb'd it.)	      absorbs him as affectionately as he has absorb'd it.)	      absorbs him as affectionately as he has absorb'd it.)	      absorbs him as affectionately as he has absorb'd it.)
			
  He masters whose spirit masters, he tastes sweetest who results	  He masters whose spirit masters, he tastes sweetest who results	  He masters whose spirit masters, he tastes sweetest who results	  He masters whose spirit masters, he tastes sweetest who results
      sweetest in the long run,	      sweetest in the long run,	      sweetest in the long run,	      sweetest in the long run,
  The blood of the brawn beloved of time is unconstraint;	  The blood of the brawn beloved of time is unconstraint;	  The blood of the brawn beloved of time is unconstraint;	  The blood of the brawn beloved of time is unconstraint;
  In the need of songs, philosophy, an appropriate native grand-opera,	  In the need of songs, philosophy, an appropriate native grand-opera,	  In the need of songs, philosophy, an appropriate native grand-opera,	  In the need of songs, philosophy, an appropriate native grand-opera,
      shipcraft, any craft,	      shipcraft, any craft,	      shipcraft, any craft,	      shipcraft, any craft,
  He or she is greatest who contributes the greatest original	  He or she is greatest who contributes the greatest original	  He or she is greatest who contributes the greatest original	  He or she is greatest who contributes the greatest original
      practical example.	      practical example.	      practical example.	      practical example.
			
  Already a nonchalant breed, silently emerging, appears on the streets,	  Already a nonchalant breed, silently emerging, appears on the streets,	  Already a nonchalant breed, silently emerging, appears on the streets,	  Already a nonchalant breed, silently emerging, appears on the streets,
  People's lips salute only doers, lovers, satisfiers, positive knowers,	  People's lips salute only doers, lovers, satisfiers, positive knowers,	  People's lips salute only doers, lovers, satisfiers, positive knowers,	  People's lips salute only doers, lovers, satisfiers, positive knowers,
  There will shortly be no more priests, I say their work is done,	  There will shortly be no more priests, I say their work is done,	  There will shortly be no more priests, I say their work is done,	  There will shortly be no more priests, I say their work is done,
  Death is without emergencies here, but life is perpetual emergencies here,	  Death is without emergencies here, but life is perpetual emergencies here,	  Death is without emergencies here, but life is perpetual emergencies here,	  Death is without emergencies here, but life is perpetual emergencies here,
  Are your body, days, manners, superb? after death you shall be superb,	  Are your body, days, manners, superb? after death you shall be superb,	  Are your body, days, manners, superb? after death you shall be superb,	  Are your body, days, manners, superb? after death you shall be superb,
  Justice, health, self-esteem, clear the way with irresistible power;	  Justice, health, self-esteem, clear the way with irresistible power;	  Justice, health, self-esteem, clear the way with irresistible power;	  Justice, health, self-esteem, clear the way with irresistible power;
  How dare you place any thing before a man?	  How dare you place any thing before a man?	  How dare you place any thing before a man?	  How dare you place any thing before a man?
			
       14	       14	       14	       14
  Fall behind me States!	  Fall behind me States!	  Fall behind me States!	  Fall behind me States!
  A man before all--myself, typical, before all.	  A man before all--myself, typical, before all.	  A man before all--myself, typical, before all.	  A man before all--myself, typical, before all.
			
  Give me the pay I have served for,	  Give me the pay I have served for,	  Give me the pay I have served for,	  Give me the pay I have served for,
  Give me to sing the songs of the great Idea, take all the rest,	  Give me to sing the songs of the great Idea, take all the rest,	  Give me to sing the songs of the great Idea, take all the rest,	  Give me to sing the songs of the great Idea, take all the rest,
  I have loved the earth, sun, animals, I have despised riches,	  I have loved the earth, sun, animals, I have despised riches,	  I have loved the earth, sun, animals, I have despised riches,	  I have loved the earth, sun, animals, I have despised riches,
  I have given aims to every one that ask'd, stood up for the stupid	  I have given aims to every one that ask'd, stood up for the stupid	  I have given aims to every one that ask'd, stood up for the stupid	  I have given aims to every one that ask'd, stood up for the stupid
      and crazy, devoted my income and labor to others,	      and crazy, devoted my income and labor to others,	      and crazy, devoted my income and labor to others,	      and crazy, devoted my income and labor to others,
  Hated tyrants, argued not concerning God, had patience and indulgence	  Hated tyrants, argued not concerning God, had patience and indulgence	  Hated tyrants, argued not concerning God, had patience and indulgence	  Hated tyrants, argued not concerning God, had patience and indulgence
      toward the people, taken off my hat to nothing known or unknown,	      toward the people, taken off my hat to nothing known or unknown,	      toward the people, taken off my hat to nothing known or unknown,	      toward the people, taken off my hat to nothing known or unknown,
  Gone freely with powerful uneducated persons and with the young,	  Gone freely with powerful uneducated persons and with the young,	  Gone freely with powerful uneducated persons and with the young,	  Gone freely with powerful uneducated persons and with the young,
      and with the mothers of families,	      and with the mothers of families,	      and with the mothers of families,	      and with the mothers of families,
  Read these leaves to myself in the open air, tried them by trees,	  Read these leaves to myself in the open air, tried them by trees,	  Read these leaves to myself in the open air, tried them by trees,	  Read these leaves to myself in the open air, tried them by trees,
      stars, rivers,	      stars, rivers,	      stars, rivers,	      stars, rivers,
  Dismiss'd whatever insulted my own soul or defiled my body,	  Dismiss'd whatever insulted my own soul or defiled my body,	  Dismiss'd whatever insulted my own soul or defiled my body,	  Dismiss'd whatever insulted my own soul or defiled my body,
  Claim'd nothing to myself which I have not carefully claim'd for	  Claim'd nothing to myself which I have not carefully claim'd for	  Claim'd nothing to myself which I have not carefully claim'd for	  Claim'd nothing to myself which I have not carefully claim'd for
      others on the same terms,	      others on the same terms,	      others on the same terms,	      others on the same terms,
  Sped to the camps, and comrades found and accepted from every State,	  Sped to the camps, and comrades found and accepted from every State,	  Sped to the camps, and comrades found and accepted from every State,	  Sped to the camps, and comrades found and accepted from every State,
  (Upon this breast has many a dying soldier lean'd to breathe his last,	  (Upon this breast has many a dying soldier lean'd to breathe his last,	  (Upon this breast has many a dying soldier lean'd to breathe his last,	  (Upon this breast has many a dying soldier lean'd to breathe his last,
  This arm, this hand, this voice, have nourish'd, rais'd, restored,	  This arm, this hand, this voice, have nourish'd, rais'd, restored,	  This arm, this hand, this voice, have nourish'd, rais'd, restored,	  This arm, this hand, this voice, have nourish'd, rais'd, restored,
  To life recalling many a prostrate form;)	  To life recalling many a prostrate form;)	  To life recalling many a prostrate form;)	  To life recalling many a prostrate form;)
  I am willing to wait to be understood by the growth of the taste of myself,	  I am willing to wait to be understood by the growth of the taste of myself,	  I am willing to wait to be understood by the growth of the taste of myself,	  I am willing to wait to be understood by the growth of the taste of myself,
  Rejecting none, permitting all.	  Rejecting none, permitting all.	  Rejecting none, permitting all.	  Rejecting none, permitting all.
			
  (Say O Mother, have I not to your thought been faithful?	  (Say O Mother, have I not to your thought been faithful?	  (Say O Mother, have I not to your thought been faithful?	  (Say O Mother, have I not to your thought been faithful?
  Have I not through life kept you and yours before me?)	  Have I not through life kept you and yours before me?)	  Have I not through life kept you and yours before me?)	  Have I not through life kept you and yours before me?)
			
       15	       15	       15	       15
  I swear I begin to see the meaning of these things,	  I swear I begin to see the meaning of these things,	  I swear I begin to see the meaning of these things,	  I swear I begin to see the meaning of these things,
  It is not the earth, it is not America who is so great,	  It is not the earth, it is not America who is so great,	  It is not the earth, it is not America who is so great,	  It is not the earth, it is not America who is so great,
  It is I who am great or to be great, it is You up there, or any one,	  It is I who am great or to be great, it is You up there, or any one,	  It is I who am great or to be great, it is You up there, or any one,	  It is I who am great or to be great, it is You up there, or any one,
  It is to walk rapidly through civilizations, governments, theories,	  It is to walk rapidly through civilizations, governments, theories,	  It is to walk rapidly through civilizations, governments, theories,	  It is to walk rapidly through civilizations, governments, theories,
  Through poems, pageants, shows, to form individuals.	  Through poems, pageants, shows, to form individuals.	  Through poems, pageants, shows, to form individuals.	  Through poems, pageants, shows, to form individuals.
			
  Underneath all, individuals,	  Underneath all, individuals,	  Underneath all, individuals,	  Underneath all, individuals,
  I swear nothing is good to me now that ignores individuals,	  I swear nothing is good to me now that ignores individuals,	  I swear nothing is good to me now that ignores individuals,	  I swear nothing is good to me now that ignores individuals,
  The American compact is altogether with individuals,	  The American compact is altogether with individuals,	  The American compact is altogether with individuals,	  The American compact is altogether with individuals,
  The only government is that which makes minute of individuals,	  The only government is that which makes minute of individuals,	  The only government is that which makes minute of individuals,	  The only government is that which makes minute of individuals,
  The whole theory of the universe is directed unerringly to one	  The whole theory of the universe is directed unerringly to one	  The whole theory of the universe is directed unerringly to one	  The whole theory of the universe is directed unerringly to one
      single individual--namely to You.	      single individual--namely to You.	      single individual--namely to You.	      single individual--namely to You.
			
  (Mother! with subtle sense severe, with the naked sword in your hand,	  (Mother! with subtle sense severe, with the naked sword in your hand,	  (Mother! with subtle sense severe, with the naked sword in your hand,	  (Mother! with subtle sense severe, with the naked sword in your hand,
  I saw you at last refuse to treat but directly with individuals.)	  I saw you at last refuse to treat but directly with individuals.)	  I saw you at last refuse to treat but directly with individuals.)	  I saw you at last refuse to treat but directly with individuals.)
			
       16	       16	       16	       16
  Underneath all, Nativity,	  Underneath all, Nativity,	  Underneath all, Nativity,	  Underneath all, Nativity,
  I swear I will stand by my own nativity, pious or impious so be it;	  I swear I will stand by my own nativity, pious or impious so be it;	  I swear I will stand by my own nativity, pious or impious so be it;	  I swear I will stand by my own nativity, pious or impious so be it;
  I swear I am charm'd with nothing except nativity,	  I swear I am charm'd with nothing except nativity,	  I swear I am charm'd with nothing except nativity,	  I swear I am charm'd with nothing except nativity,
  Men, women, cities, nations, are only beautiful from nativity.	  Men, women, cities, nations, are only beautiful from nativity.	  Men, women, cities, nations, are only beautiful from nativity.	  Men, women, cities, nations, are only beautiful from nativity.
			
  Underneath all is the Expression of love for men and women,	  Underneath all is the Expression of love for men and women,	  Underneath all is the Expression of love for men and women,	  Underneath all is the Expression of love for men and women,
  (I swear I have seen enough of mean and impotent modes of expressing	  (I swear I have seen enough of mean and impotent modes of expressing	  (I swear I have seen enough of mean and impotent modes of expressing	  (I swear I have seen enough of mean and impotent modes of expressing
      love for men and women,	      love for men and women,	      love for men and women,	      love for men and women,
  After this day I take my own modes of expressing love for men and	  After this day I take my own modes of expressing love for men and	  After this day I take my own modes of expressing love for men and	  After this day I take my own modes of expressing love for men and
      women.) in myself,	      women.) in myself,	      women.) in myself,	      women.) in myself,
			
  I swear I will have each quality of my race in myself,	  I swear I will have each quality of my race in myself,	  I swear I will have each quality of my race in myself,	  I swear I will have each quality of my race in myself,
  (Talk as you like, he only suits these States whose manners favor	  (Talk as you like, he only suits these States whose manners favor	  (Talk as you like, he only suits these States whose manners favor	  (Talk as you like, he only suits these States whose manners favor
      the audacity and sublime turbulence of the States.)	      the audacity and sublime turbulence of the States.)	      the audacity and sublime turbulence of the States.)	      the audacity and sublime turbulence of the States.)
			
  Underneath the lessons of things, spirits, Nature, governments,	  Underneath the lessons of things, spirits, Nature, governments,	  Underneath the lessons of things, spirits, Nature, governments,	  Underneath the lessons of things, spirits, Nature, governments,
      ownerships, I swear I perceive other lessons,	      ownerships, I swear I perceive other lessons,	      ownerships, I swear I perceive other lessons,	      ownerships, I swear I perceive other lessons,
  Underneath all to me is myself, to you yourself, (the same	  Underneath all to me is myself, to you yourself, (the same	  Underneath all to me is myself, to you yourself, (the same	  Underneath all to me is myself, to you yourself, (the same
      monotonous old song.)	      monotonous old song.)	      monotonous old song.)	      monotonous old song.)
			
       17	       17	       17	       17
  O I see flashing that this America is only you and me,	  O I see flashing that this America is only you and me,	  O I see flashing that this America is only you and me,	  O I see flashing that this America is only you and me,
  Its power, weapons, testimony, are you and me,	  Its power, weapons, testimony, are you and me,	  Its power, weapons, testimony, are you and me,	  Its power, weapons, testimony, are you and me,
  Its crimes, lies, thefts, defections, are you and me,	  Its crimes, lies, thefts, defections, are you and me,	  Its crimes, lies, thefts, defections, are you and me,	  Its crimes, lies, thefts, defections, are you and me,
  Its Congress is you and me, the officers, capitols, armies, ships,	  Its Congress is you and me, the officers, capitols, armies, ships,	  Its Congress is you and me, the officers, capitols, armies, ships,	  Its Congress is you and me, the officers, capitols, armies, ships,
      are you and me,	      are you and me,	      are you and me,	      are you and me,
  Its endless gestations of new States are you and me,	  Its endless gestations of new States are you and me,	  Its endless gestations of new States are you and me,	  Its endless gestations of new States are you and me,
  The war, (that war so bloody and grim, the war I will henceforth	  The war, (that war so bloody and grim, the war I will henceforth	  The war, (that war so bloody and grim, the war I will henceforth	  The war, (that war so bloody and grim, the war I will henceforth
      forget), was you and me,	      forget), was you and me,	      forget), was you and me,	      forget), was you and me,
  Natural and artificial are you and me,	  Natural and artificial are you and me,	  Natural and artificial are you and me,	  Natural and artificial are you and me,
  Freedom, language, poems, employments, are you and me,	  Freedom, language, poems, employments, are you and me,	  Freedom, language, poems, employments, are you and me,	  Freedom, language, poems, employments, are you and me,
  Past, present, future, are you and me.	  Past, present, future, are you and me.	  Past, present, future, are you and me.	  Past, present, future, are you and me.
			
  I dare not shirk any part of myself,	  I dare not shirk any part of myself,	  I dare not shirk any part of myself,	  I dare not shirk any part of myself,
  Not any part of America good or bad,	  Not any part of America good or bad,	  Not any part of America good or bad,	  Not any part of America good or bad,
  Not to build for that which builds for mankind,	  Not to build for that which builds for mankind,	  Not to build for that which builds for mankind,	  Not to build for that which builds for mankind,
  Not to balance ranks, complexions, creeds, and the sexes,	  Not to balance ranks, complexions, creeds, and the sexes,	  Not to balance ranks, complexions, creeds, and the sexes,	  Not to balance ranks, complexions, creeds, and the sexes,
  Not to justify science nor the march of equality,	  Not to justify science nor the march of equality,	  Not to justify science nor the march of equality,	  Not to justify science nor the march of equality,
  Nor to feed the arrogant blood of the brawn belov'd of time.	  Nor to feed the arrogant blood of the brawn belov'd of time.	  Nor to feed the arrogant blood of the brawn belov'd of time.	  Nor to feed the arrogant blood of the brawn belov'd of time.
			
  I am for those that have never been master'd,	  I am for those that have never been master'd,	  I am for those that have never been master'd,	  I am for those that have never been master'd,
  For men and women whose tempers have never been master'd,	  For men and women whose tempers have never been master'd,	  For men and women whose tempers have never been master'd,	  For men and women whose tempers have never been master'd,
  For those whom laws, theories, conventions, can never master.	  For those whom laws, theories, conventions, can never master.	  For those whom laws, theories, conventions, can never master.	  For those whom laws, theories, conventions, can never master.
			
  I am for those who walk abreast with the whole earth,	  I am for those who walk abreast with the whole earth,	  I am for those who walk abreast with the whole earth,	  I am for those who walk abreast with the whole earth,
  Who inaugurate one to inaugurate all.	  Who inaugurate one to inaugurate all.	  Who inaugurate one to inaugurate all.	  Who inaugurate one to inaugurate all.
			
  I will not be outfaced by irrational things,	  I will not be outfaced by irrational things,	  I will not be outfaced by irrational things,	  I will not be outfaced by irrational things,
  I will penetrate what it is in them that is sarcastic upon me,	  I will penetrate what it is in them that is sarcastic upon me,	  I will penetrate what it is in them that is sarcastic upon me,	  I will penetrate what it is in them that is sarcastic upon me,
  I will make cities and civilizations defer to me,	  I will make cities and civilizations defer to me,	  I will make cities and civilizations defer to me,	  I will make cities and civilizations defer to me,
  This is what I have learnt from America--it is the amount, and it I	  This is what I have learnt from America--it is the amount, and it I	  This is what I have learnt from America--it is the amount, and it I	  This is what I have learnt from America--it is the amount, and it I
      teach again.	      teach again.	      teach again.	      teach again.
			
  (Democracy, while weapons were everywhere aim'd at your breast,	  (Democracy, while weapons were everywhere aim'd at your breast,	  (Democracy, while weapons were everywhere aim'd at your breast,	  (Democracy, while weapons were everywhere aim'd at your breast,
  I saw you serenely give birth to immortal children, saw in dreams	  I saw you serenely give birth to immortal children, saw in dreams	  I saw you serenely give birth to immortal children, saw in dreams	  I saw you serenely give birth to immortal children, saw in dreams
      your dilating form,	      your dilating form,	      your dilating form,	      your dilating form,
  Saw you with spreading mantle covering the world.)	  Saw you with spreading mantle covering the world.)	  Saw you with spreading mantle covering the world.)	  Saw you with spreading mantle covering the world.)
			
       18	       18	       18	       18
  I will confront these shows of the day and night,	  I will confront these shows of the day and night,	  I will confront these shows of the day and night,	  I will confront these shows of the day and night,
  I will know if I am to be less than they,	  I will know if I am to be less than they,	  I will know if I am to be less than they,	  I will know if I am to be less than they,
  I will see if I am not as majestic as they,	  I will see if I am not as majestic as they,	  I will see if I am not as majestic as they,	  I will see if I am not as majestic as they,
  I will see if I am not as subtle and real as they,	  I will see if I am not as subtle and real as they,	  I will see if I am not as subtle and real as they,	  I will see if I am not as subtle and real as they,
  I will see if I am to be less generous than they,	  I will see if I am to be less generous than they,	  I will see if I am to be less generous than they,	  I will see if I am to be less generous than they,
  I will see if I have no meaning, while the houses and ships have meaning,	  I will see if I have no meaning, while the houses and ships have meaning,	  I will see if I have no meaning, while the houses and ships have meaning,	  I will see if I have no meaning, while the houses and ships have meaning,
  I will see if the fishes and birds are to be enough for themselves,	  I will see if the fishes and birds are to be enough for themselves,	  I will see if the fishes and birds are to be enough for themselves,	  I will see if the fishes and birds are to be enough for themselves,
      and I am not to be enough for myself.	      and I am not to be enough for myself.	      and I am not to be enough for myself.	      and I am not to be enough for myself.
			
  I match my spirit against yours you orbs, growths, mountains, brutes,	  I match my spirit against yours you orbs, growths, mountains, brutes,	  I match my spirit against yours you orbs, growths, mountains, brutes,	  I match my spirit against yours you orbs, growths, mountains, brutes,
  Copious as you are I absorb you all in myself, and become the master myself,	  Copious as you are I absorb you all in myself, and become the master myself,	  Copious as you are I absorb you all in myself, and become the master myself,	  Copious as you are I absorb you all in myself, and become the master myself,
  America isolated yet embodying all, what is it finally except myself?	  America isolated yet embodying all, what is it finally except myself?	  America isolated yet embodying all, what is it finally except myself?	  America isolated yet embodying all, what is it finally except myself?
  These States, what are they except myself?	  These States, what are they except myself?	  These States, what are they except myself?	  These States, what are they except myself?
			
  I know now why the earth is gross, tantalizing, wicked, it is for my sake,	  I know now why the earth is gross, tantalizing, wicked, it is for my sake,	  I know now why the earth is gross, tantalizing, wicked, it is for my sake,	  I know now why the earth is gross, tantalizing, wicked, it is for my sake,
  I take you specially to be mine, you terrible, rude forms.	  I take you specially to be mine, you terrible, rude forms.	  I take you specially to be mine, you terrible, rude forms.	  I take you specially to be mine, you terrible, rude forms.
			
			
  (Mother, bend down, bend close to me your face,	  (Mother, bend down, bend close to me your face,	  (Mother, bend down, bend close to me your face,	  (Mother, bend down, bend close to me your face,
  I know not what these plots and wars and deferments are for,	  I know not what these plots and wars and deferments are for,	  I know not what these plots and wars and deferments are for,	  I know not what these plots and wars and deferments are for,
  I know not fruition's success, but I know that through war and crime	  I know not fruition's success, but I know that through war and crime	  I know not fruition's success, but I know that through war and crime	  I know not fruition's success, but I know that through war and crime
      your work goes on, and must yet go on.)	      your work goes on, and must yet go on.)	      your work goes on, and must yet go on.)	      your work goes on, and must yet go on.)
			
       19	       19	       19	       19
  Thus by blue Ontario's shore,	  Thus by blue Ontario's shore,	  Thus by blue Ontario's shore,	  Thus by blue Ontario's shore,
  While the winds fann'd me and the waves came trooping toward me,	  While the winds fann'd me and the waves came trooping toward me,	  While the winds fann'd me and the waves came trooping toward me,	  While the winds fann'd me and the waves came trooping toward me,
  I thrill'd with the power's pulsations, and the charm of my theme	  I thrill'd with the power's pulsations, and the charm of my theme	  I thrill'd with the power's pulsations, and the charm of my theme	  I thrill'd with the power's pulsations, and the charm of my theme
      was upon me,	      was upon me,	      was upon me,	      was upon me,
  Till the tissues that held me parted their ties upon me.	  Till the tissues that held me parted their ties upon me.	  Till the tissues that held me parted their ties upon me.	  Till the tissues that held me parted their ties upon me.
			
  And I saw the free souls of poets,	  And I saw the free souls of poets,	  And I saw the free souls of poets,	  And I saw the free souls of poets,
  The loftiest bards of past ages strode before me,	  The loftiest bards of past ages strode before me,	  The loftiest bards of past ages strode before me,	  The loftiest bards of past ages strode before me,
  Strange large men, long unwaked, undisclosed, were disclosed to me.	  Strange large men, long unwaked, undisclosed, were disclosed to me.	  Strange large men, long unwaked, undisclosed, were disclosed to me.	  Strange large men, long unwaked, undisclosed, were disclosed to me.
			
       20	       20	       20	       20
  O my rapt verse, my call, mock me not!	  O my rapt verse, my call, mock me not!	  O my rapt verse, my call, mock me not!	  O my rapt verse, my call, mock me not!
  Not for the bards of the past, not to invoke them have I launch'd	  Not for the bards of the past, not to invoke them have I launch'd	  Not for the bards of the past, not to invoke them have I launch'd	  Not for the bards of the past, not to invoke them have I launch'd
      you forth,	      you forth,	      you forth,	      you forth,
  Not to call even those lofty bards here by Ontario's shores,	  Not to call even those lofty bards here by Ontario's shores,	  Not to call even those lofty bards here by Ontario's shores,	  Not to call even those lofty bards here by Ontario's shores,
  Have I sung so capricious and loud my savage song.	  Have I sung so capricious and loud my savage song.	  Have I sung so capricious and loud my savage song.	  Have I sung so capricious and loud my savage song.
			
  Bards for my own land only I invoke,	  Bards for my own land only I invoke,	  Bards for my own land only I invoke,	  Bards for my own land only I invoke,
  (For the war the war is over, the field is clear'd,)	  (For the war the war is over, the field is clear'd,)	  (For the war the war is over, the field is clear'd,)	  (For the war the war is over, the field is clear'd,)
  Till they strike up marches henceforth triumphant and onward,	  Till they strike up marches henceforth triumphant and onward,	  Till they strike up marches henceforth triumphant and onward,	  Till they strike up marches henceforth triumphant and onward,
  To cheer O Mother your boundless expectant soul.	  To cheer O Mother your boundless expectant soul.	  To cheer O Mother your boundless expectant soul.	  To cheer O Mother your boundless expectant soul.
			
  Bards of the great Idea! bards of the peaceful inventions! (for the	  Bards of the great Idea! bards of the peaceful inventions! (for the	  Bards of the great Idea! bards of the peaceful inventions! (for the	  Bards of the great Idea! bards of the peaceful inventions! (for the
      war, the war is over!)	      war, the war is over!)	      war, the war is over!)	      war, the war is over!)
  Yet bards of latent armies, a million soldiers waiting ever-ready,	  Yet bards of latent armies, a million soldiers waiting ever-ready,	  Yet bards of latent armies, a million soldiers waiting ever-ready,	  Yet bards of latent armies, a million soldiers waiting ever-ready,
  Bards with songs as from burning coals or the lightning's fork'd stripes!	  Bards with songs as from burning coals or the lightning's fork'd stripes!	  Bards with songs as from burning coals or the lightning's fork'd stripes!	  Bards with songs as from burning coals or the lightning's fork'd stripes!
  Ample Ohio's, Kanada's bards--bards of California! inland bards--	  Ample Ohio's, Kanada's bards--bards of California! inland bards--	  Ample Ohio's, Kanada's bards--bards of California! inland bards--	  Ample Ohio's, Kanada's bards--bards of California! inland bards--
      bards of the war!	      bards of the war!	      bards of the war!	      bards of the war!
  You by my charm I invoke.	  You by my charm I invoke.	  You by my charm I invoke.	  You by my charm I invoke.
			
			
			
			
Reversals	Reversals	Reversals	Reversals
			
  Let that which stood in front go behind,	  Let that which stood in front go behind,	  Let that which stood in front go behind,	  Let that which stood in front go behind,
  Let that which was behind advance to the front,	  Let that which was behind advance to the front,	  Let that which was behind advance to the front,	  Let that which was behind advance to the front,
  Let bigots, fools, unclean persons, offer new propositions,	  Let bigots, fools, unclean persons, offer new propositions,	  Let bigots, fools, unclean persons, offer new propositions,	  Let bigots, fools, unclean persons, offer new propositions,
  Let the old propositions be postponed,	  Let the old propositions be postponed,	  Let the old propositions be postponed,	  Let the old propositions be postponed,
  Let a man seek pleasure everywhere except in himself,	  Let a man seek pleasure everywhere except in himself,	  Let a man seek pleasure everywhere except in himself,	  Let a man seek pleasure everywhere except in himself,
  Let a woman seek happiness everywhere except in herself	  Let a woman seek happiness everywhere except in herself	  Let a woman seek happiness everywhere except in herself	  Let a woman seek happiness everywhere except in herself
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXIV.  AUTUMN RIVULETS	BOOK XXIV.  AUTUMN RIVULETS	BOOK XXIV.  AUTUMN RIVULETS	BOOK XXIV.  AUTUMN RIVULETS
			
			
As Consequent, Etc.	As Consequent, Etc.	As Consequent, Etc.	As Consequent, Etc.
			
  As consequent from store of summer rains,	  As consequent from store of summer rains,	  As consequent from store of summer rains,	  As consequent from store of summer rains,
  Or wayward rivulets in autumn flowing,	  Or wayward rivulets in autumn flowing,	  Or wayward rivulets in autumn flowing,	  Or wayward rivulets in autumn flowing,
  Or many a herb-lined brook's reticulations,	  Or many a herb-lined brook's reticulations,	  Or many a herb-lined brook's reticulations,	  Or many a herb-lined brook's reticulations,
  Or subterranean sea-rills making for the sea,	  Or subterranean sea-rills making for the sea,	  Or subterranean sea-rills making for the sea,	  Or subterranean sea-rills making for the sea,
  Songs of continued years I sing.	  Songs of continued years I sing.	  Songs of continued years I sing.	  Songs of continued years I sing.
			
  Life's ever-modern rapids first, (soon, soon to blend,	  Life's ever-modern rapids first, (soon, soon to blend,	  Life's ever-modern rapids first, (soon, soon to blend,	  Life's ever-modern rapids first, (soon, soon to blend,
  With the old streams of death.)	  With the old streams of death.)	  With the old streams of death.)	  With the old streams of death.)
			
  Some threading Ohio's farm-fields or the woods,	  Some threading Ohio's farm-fields or the woods,	  Some threading Ohio's farm-fields or the woods,	  Some threading Ohio's farm-fields or the woods,
  Some down Colorado's canons from sources of perpetual snow,	  Some down Colorado's canons from sources of perpetual snow,	  Some down Colorado's canons from sources of perpetual snow,	  Some down Colorado's canons from sources of perpetual snow,
  Some half-hid in Oregon, or away southward in Texas,	  Some half-hid in Oregon, or away southward in Texas,	  Some half-hid in Oregon, or away southward in Texas,	  Some half-hid in Oregon, or away southward in Texas,
  Some in the north finding their way to Erie, Niagara, Ottawa,	  Some in the north finding their way to Erie, Niagara, Ottawa,	  Some in the north finding their way to Erie, Niagara, Ottawa,	  Some in the north finding their way to Erie, Niagara, Ottawa,
  Some to Atlantica's bays, and so to the great salt brine.	  Some to Atlantica's bays, and so to the great salt brine.	  Some to Atlantica's bays, and so to the great salt brine.	  Some to Atlantica's bays, and so to the great salt brine.
			
  In you whoe'er you are my book perusing,	  In you whoe'er you are my book perusing,	  In you whoe'er you are my book perusing,	  In you whoe'er you are my book perusing,
  In I myself, in all the world, these currents flowing,	  In I myself, in all the world, these currents flowing,	  In I myself, in all the world, these currents flowing,	  In I myself, in all the world, these currents flowing,
  All, all toward the mystic ocean tending.	  All, all toward the mystic ocean tending.	  All, all toward the mystic ocean tending.	  All, all toward the mystic ocean tending.
			
  Currents for starting a continent new,	  Currents for starting a continent new,	  Currents for starting a continent new,	  Currents for starting a continent new,
  Overtures sent to the solid out of the liquid,	  Overtures sent to the solid out of the liquid,	  Overtures sent to the solid out of the liquid,	  Overtures sent to the solid out of the liquid,
  Fusion of ocean and land, tender and pensive waves,	  Fusion of ocean and land, tender and pensive waves,	  Fusion of ocean and land, tender and pensive waves,	  Fusion of ocean and land, tender and pensive waves,
  (Not safe and peaceful only, waves rous'd and ominous too,	  (Not safe and peaceful only, waves rous'd and ominous too,	  (Not safe and peaceful only, waves rous'd and ominous too,	  (Not safe and peaceful only, waves rous'd and ominous too,
  Out of the depths the storm's abysmic waves, who knows whence?	  Out of the depths the storm's abysmic waves, who knows whence?	  Out of the depths the storm's abysmic waves, who knows whence?	  Out of the depths the storm's abysmic waves, who knows whence?
  Raging over the vast, with many a broken spar and tatter'd sail.)	  Raging over the vast, with many a broken spar and tatter'd sail.)	  Raging over the vast, with many a broken spar and tatter'd sail.)	  Raging over the vast, with many a broken spar and tatter'd sail.)
			
  Or from the sea of Time, collecting vasting all, I bring,	  Or from the sea of Time, collecting vasting all, I bring,	  Or from the sea of Time, collecting vasting all, I bring,	  Or from the sea of Time, collecting vasting all, I bring,
  A windrow-drift of weeds and shells.	  A windrow-drift of weeds and shells.	  A windrow-drift of weeds and shells.	  A windrow-drift of weeds and shells.
			
  O little shells, so curious-convolute, so limpid-cold and voiceless,	  O little shells, so curious-convolute, so limpid-cold and voiceless,	  O little shells, so curious-convolute, so limpid-cold and voiceless,	  O little shells, so curious-convolute, so limpid-cold and voiceless,
  Will you not little shells to the tympans of temples held,	  Will you not little shells to the tympans of temples held,	  Will you not little shells to the tympans of temples held,	  Will you not little shells to the tympans of temples held,
  Murmurs and echoes still call up, eternity's music faint and far,	  Murmurs and echoes still call up, eternity's music faint and far,	  Murmurs and echoes still call up, eternity's music faint and far,	  Murmurs and echoes still call up, eternity's music faint and far,
  Wafted inland, sent from Atlantica's rim, strains for the soul of	  Wafted inland, sent from Atlantica's rim, strains for the soul of	  Wafted inland, sent from Atlantica's rim, strains for the soul of	  Wafted inland, sent from Atlantica's rim, strains for the soul of
      the prairies,	      the prairies,	      the prairies,	      the prairies,
  Whisper'd reverberations, chords for the ear of the West joyously sounding,	  Whisper'd reverberations, chords for the ear of the West joyously sounding,	  Whisper'd reverberations, chords for the ear of the West joyously sounding,	  Whisper'd reverberations, chords for the ear of the West joyously sounding,
  Your tidings old, yet ever new and untranslatable,	  Your tidings old, yet ever new and untranslatable,	  Your tidings old, yet ever new and untranslatable,	  Your tidings old, yet ever new and untranslatable,
  Infinitesimals out of my life, and many a life,	  Infinitesimals out of my life, and many a life,	  Infinitesimals out of my life, and many a life,	  Infinitesimals out of my life, and many a life,
  (For not my life and years alone I give--all, all I give,)	  (For not my life and years alone I give--all, all I give,)	  (For not my life and years alone I give--all, all I give,)	  (For not my life and years alone I give--all, all I give,)
  These waifs from the deep, cast high and dry,	  These waifs from the deep, cast high and dry,	  These waifs from the deep, cast high and dry,	  These waifs from the deep, cast high and dry,
  Wash'd on America's shores?	  Wash'd on America's shores?	  Wash'd on America's shores?	  Wash'd on America's shores?
			
			
			
			
The Return of the Heroes	The Return of the Heroes	The Return of the Heroes	The Return of the Heroes
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  For the lands and for these passionate days and for myself,	  For the lands and for these passionate days and for myself,	  For the lands and for these passionate days and for myself,	  For the lands and for these passionate days and for myself,
  Now I awhile retire to thee O soil of autumn fields,	  Now I awhile retire to thee O soil of autumn fields,	  Now I awhile retire to thee O soil of autumn fields,	  Now I awhile retire to thee O soil of autumn fields,
  Reclining on thy breast, giving myself to thee,	  Reclining on thy breast, giving myself to thee,	  Reclining on thy breast, giving myself to thee,	  Reclining on thy breast, giving myself to thee,
  Answering the pulses of thy sane and equable heart,	  Answering the pulses of thy sane and equable heart,	  Answering the pulses of thy sane and equable heart,	  Answering the pulses of thy sane and equable heart,
  Turning a verse for thee.	  Turning a verse for thee.	  Turning a verse for thee.	  Turning a verse for thee.
			
  O earth that hast no voice, confide to me a voice,	  O earth that hast no voice, confide to me a voice,	  O earth that hast no voice, confide to me a voice,	  O earth that hast no voice, confide to me a voice,
  O harvest of my lands--O boundless summer growths,	  O harvest of my lands--O boundless summer growths,	  O harvest of my lands--O boundless summer growths,	  O harvest of my lands--O boundless summer growths,
  O lavish brown parturient earth--O infinite teeming womb,	  O lavish brown parturient earth--O infinite teeming womb,	  O lavish brown parturient earth--O infinite teeming womb,	  O lavish brown parturient earth--O infinite teeming womb,
  A song to narrate thee.	  A song to narrate thee.	  A song to narrate thee.	  A song to narrate thee.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Ever upon this stage,	  Ever upon this stage,	  Ever upon this stage,	  Ever upon this stage,
  Is acted God's calm annual drama,	  Is acted God's calm annual drama,	  Is acted God's calm annual drama,	  Is acted God's calm annual drama,
  Gorgeous processions, songs of birds,	  Gorgeous processions, songs of birds,	  Gorgeous processions, songs of birds,	  Gorgeous processions, songs of birds,
  Sunrise that fullest feeds and freshens most the soul,	  Sunrise that fullest feeds and freshens most the soul,	  Sunrise that fullest feeds and freshens most the soul,	  Sunrise that fullest feeds and freshens most the soul,
  The heaving sea, the waves upon the shore, the musical, strong waves,	  The heaving sea, the waves upon the shore, the musical, strong waves,	  The heaving sea, the waves upon the shore, the musical, strong waves,	  The heaving sea, the waves upon the shore, the musical, strong waves,
  The woods, the stalwart trees, the slender, tapering trees,	  The woods, the stalwart trees, the slender, tapering trees,	  The woods, the stalwart trees, the slender, tapering trees,	  The woods, the stalwart trees, the slender, tapering trees,
  The liliput countless armies of the grass,	  The liliput countless armies of the grass,	  The liliput countless armies of the grass,	  The liliput countless armies of the grass,
  The heat, the showers, the measureless pasturages,	  The heat, the showers, the measureless pasturages,	  The heat, the showers, the measureless pasturages,	  The heat, the showers, the measureless pasturages,
  The scenery of the snows, the winds' free orchestra,	  The scenery of the snows, the winds' free orchestra,	  The scenery of the snows, the winds' free orchestra,	  The scenery of the snows, the winds' free orchestra,
  The stretching light-hung roof of clouds, the clear cerulean and the	  The stretching light-hung roof of clouds, the clear cerulean and the	  The stretching light-hung roof of clouds, the clear cerulean and the	  The stretching light-hung roof of clouds, the clear cerulean and the
      silvery fringes,	      silvery fringes,	      silvery fringes,	      silvery fringes,
  The high-dilating stars, the placid beckoning stars,	  The high-dilating stars, the placid beckoning stars,	  The high-dilating stars, the placid beckoning stars,	  The high-dilating stars, the placid beckoning stars,
  The moving flocks and herds, the plains and emerald meadows,	  The moving flocks and herds, the plains and emerald meadows,	  The moving flocks and herds, the plains and emerald meadows,	  The moving flocks and herds, the plains and emerald meadows,
  The shows of all the varied lands and all the growths and products.	  The shows of all the varied lands and all the growths and products.	  The shows of all the varied lands and all the growths and products.	  The shows of all the varied lands and all the growths and products.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Fecund America--today,	  Fecund America--today,	  Fecund America--today,	  Fecund America--today,
  Thou art all over set in births and joys!	  Thou art all over set in births and joys!	  Thou art all over set in births and joys!	  Thou art all over set in births and joys!
  Thou groan'st with riches, thy wealth clothes thee as a swathing-garment,	  Thou groan'st with riches, thy wealth clothes thee as a swathing-garment,	  Thou groan'st with riches, thy wealth clothes thee as a swathing-garment,	  Thou groan'st with riches, thy wealth clothes thee as a swathing-garment,
  Thou laughest loud with ache of great possessions,	  Thou laughest loud with ache of great possessions,	  Thou laughest loud with ache of great possessions,	  Thou laughest loud with ache of great possessions,
  A myriad-twining life like interlacing vines binds all thy vast demesne,	  A myriad-twining life like interlacing vines binds all thy vast demesne,	  A myriad-twining life like interlacing vines binds all thy vast demesne,	  A myriad-twining life like interlacing vines binds all thy vast demesne,
  As some huge ship freighted to water's edge thou ridest into port,	  As some huge ship freighted to water's edge thou ridest into port,	  As some huge ship freighted to water's edge thou ridest into port,	  As some huge ship freighted to water's edge thou ridest into port,
  As rain falls from the heaven and vapors rise from earth, so have	  As rain falls from the heaven and vapors rise from earth, so have	  As rain falls from the heaven and vapors rise from earth, so have	  As rain falls from the heaven and vapors rise from earth, so have
      the precious values fallen upon thee and risen out of thee;	      the precious values fallen upon thee and risen out of thee;	      the precious values fallen upon thee and risen out of thee;	      the precious values fallen upon thee and risen out of thee;
  Thou envy of the globe! thou miracle!	  Thou envy of the globe! thou miracle!	  Thou envy of the globe! thou miracle!	  Thou envy of the globe! thou miracle!
  Thou, bathed, choked, swimming in plenty,	  Thou, bathed, choked, swimming in plenty,	  Thou, bathed, choked, swimming in plenty,	  Thou, bathed, choked, swimming in plenty,
  Thou lucky Mistress of the tranquil barns,	  Thou lucky Mistress of the tranquil barns,	  Thou lucky Mistress of the tranquil barns,	  Thou lucky Mistress of the tranquil barns,
  Thou Prairie Dame that sittest in the middle and lookest out upon	  Thou Prairie Dame that sittest in the middle and lookest out upon	  Thou Prairie Dame that sittest in the middle and lookest out upon	  Thou Prairie Dame that sittest in the middle and lookest out upon
      thy world, and lookest East and lookest West,	      thy world, and lookest East and lookest West,	      thy world, and lookest East and lookest West,	      thy world, and lookest East and lookest West,
  Dispensatress, that by a word givest a thousand miles, a million	  Dispensatress, that by a word givest a thousand miles, a million	  Dispensatress, that by a word givest a thousand miles, a million	  Dispensatress, that by a word givest a thousand miles, a million
      farms, and missest nothing,	      farms, and missest nothing,	      farms, and missest nothing,	      farms, and missest nothing,
  Thou all-acceptress--thou hospitable, (thou only art hospitable as	  Thou all-acceptress--thou hospitable, (thou only art hospitable as	  Thou all-acceptress--thou hospitable, (thou only art hospitable as	  Thou all-acceptress--thou hospitable, (thou only art hospitable as
      God is hospitable.)	      God is hospitable.)	      God is hospitable.)	      God is hospitable.)
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  When late I sang sad was my voice,	  When late I sang sad was my voice,	  When late I sang sad was my voice,	  When late I sang sad was my voice,
  Sad were the shows around me with deafening noises of hatred and	  Sad were the shows around me with deafening noises of hatred and	  Sad were the shows around me with deafening noises of hatred and	  Sad were the shows around me with deafening noises of hatred and
      smoke of war;	      smoke of war;	      smoke of war;	      smoke of war;
  In the midst of the conflict, the heroes, I stood,	  In the midst of the conflict, the heroes, I stood,	  In the midst of the conflict, the heroes, I stood,	  In the midst of the conflict, the heroes, I stood,
  Or pass'd with slow step through the wounded and dying.	  Or pass'd with slow step through the wounded and dying.	  Or pass'd with slow step through the wounded and dying.	  Or pass'd with slow step through the wounded and dying.
			
  But now I sing not war,	  But now I sing not war,	  But now I sing not war,	  But now I sing not war,
  Nor the measur'd march of soldiers, nor the tents of camps,	  Nor the measur'd march of soldiers, nor the tents of camps,	  Nor the measur'd march of soldiers, nor the tents of camps,	  Nor the measur'd march of soldiers, nor the tents of camps,
  Nor the regiments hastily coming up deploying in line of battle;	  Nor the regiments hastily coming up deploying in line of battle;	  Nor the regiments hastily coming up deploying in line of battle;	  Nor the regiments hastily coming up deploying in line of battle;
  No more the sad, unnatural shows of war.	  No more the sad, unnatural shows of war.	  No more the sad, unnatural shows of war.	  No more the sad, unnatural shows of war.
			
  Ask'd room those flush'd immortal ranks, the first forth-stepping armies?	  Ask'd room those flush'd immortal ranks, the first forth-stepping armies?	  Ask'd room those flush'd immortal ranks, the first forth-stepping armies?	  Ask'd room those flush'd immortal ranks, the first forth-stepping armies?
  Ask room alas the ghastly ranks, the armies dread that follow'd.	  Ask room alas the ghastly ranks, the armies dread that follow'd.	  Ask room alas the ghastly ranks, the armies dread that follow'd.	  Ask room alas the ghastly ranks, the armies dread that follow'd.
			
  (Pass, pass, ye proud brigades, with your tramping sinewy legs,	  (Pass, pass, ye proud brigades, with your tramping sinewy legs,	  (Pass, pass, ye proud brigades, with your tramping sinewy legs,	  (Pass, pass, ye proud brigades, with your tramping sinewy legs,
  With your shoulders young and strong, with your knapsacks and your muskets;	  With your shoulders young and strong, with your knapsacks and your muskets;	  With your shoulders young and strong, with your knapsacks and your muskets;	  With your shoulders young and strong, with your knapsacks and your muskets;
  How elate I stood and watch'd you, where starting off you march'd.	  How elate I stood and watch'd you, where starting off you march'd.	  How elate I stood and watch'd you, where starting off you march'd.	  How elate I stood and watch'd you, where starting off you march'd.
			
  Pass--then rattle drums again,	  Pass--then rattle drums again,	  Pass--then rattle drums again,	  Pass--then rattle drums again,
  For an army heaves in sight, O another gathering army,	  For an army heaves in sight, O another gathering army,	  For an army heaves in sight, O another gathering army,	  For an army heaves in sight, O another gathering army,
  Swarming, trailing on the rear, O you dread accruing army,	  Swarming, trailing on the rear, O you dread accruing army,	  Swarming, trailing on the rear, O you dread accruing army,	  Swarming, trailing on the rear, O you dread accruing army,
  O you regiments so piteous, with your mortal diarrhoea, with your fever,	  O you regiments so piteous, with your mortal diarrhoea, with your fever,	  O you regiments so piteous, with your mortal diarrhoea, with your fever,	  O you regiments so piteous, with your mortal diarrhoea, with your fever,
  O my land's maim'd darlings, with the plenteous bloody bandage and	  O my land's maim'd darlings, with the plenteous bloody bandage and	  O my land's maim'd darlings, with the plenteous bloody bandage and	  O my land's maim'd darlings, with the plenteous bloody bandage and
      the crutch,	      the crutch,	      the crutch,	      the crutch,
  Lo, your pallid army follows.)	  Lo, your pallid army follows.)	  Lo, your pallid army follows.)	  Lo, your pallid army follows.)
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  But on these days of brightness,	  But on these days of brightness,	  But on these days of brightness,	  But on these days of brightness,
  On the far-stretching beauteous landscape, the roads and lanes the	  On the far-stretching beauteous landscape, the roads and lanes the	  On the far-stretching beauteous landscape, the roads and lanes the	  On the far-stretching beauteous landscape, the roads and lanes the
      high-piled farm-wagons, and the fruits and barns,	      high-piled farm-wagons, and the fruits and barns,	      high-piled farm-wagons, and the fruits and barns,	      high-piled farm-wagons, and the fruits and barns,
  Should the dead intrude?	  Should the dead intrude?	  Should the dead intrude?	  Should the dead intrude?
			
  Ah the dead to me mar not, they fit well in Nature,	  Ah the dead to me mar not, they fit well in Nature,	  Ah the dead to me mar not, they fit well in Nature,	  Ah the dead to me mar not, they fit well in Nature,
  They fit very well in the landscape under the trees and grass,	  They fit very well in the landscape under the trees and grass,	  They fit very well in the landscape under the trees and grass,	  They fit very well in the landscape under the trees and grass,
  And along the edge of the sky in the horizon's far margin.	  And along the edge of the sky in the horizon's far margin.	  And along the edge of the sky in the horizon's far margin.	  And along the edge of the sky in the horizon's far margin.
			
  Nor do I forget you Departed,	  Nor do I forget you Departed,	  Nor do I forget you Departed,	  Nor do I forget you Departed,
  Nor in winter or summer my lost ones,	  Nor in winter or summer my lost ones,	  Nor in winter or summer my lost ones,	  Nor in winter or summer my lost ones,
  But most in the open air as now when my soul is rapt and at peace,	  But most in the open air as now when my soul is rapt and at peace,	  But most in the open air as now when my soul is rapt and at peace,	  But most in the open air as now when my soul is rapt and at peace,
      like pleasing phantoms,	      like pleasing phantoms,	      like pleasing phantoms,	      like pleasing phantoms,
  Your memories rising glide silently by me.	  Your memories rising glide silently by me.	  Your memories rising glide silently by me.	  Your memories rising glide silently by me.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  I saw the day the return of the heroes,	  I saw the day the return of the heroes,	  I saw the day the return of the heroes,	  I saw the day the return of the heroes,
  (Yet the heroes never surpass'd shall never return,	  (Yet the heroes never surpass'd shall never return,	  (Yet the heroes never surpass'd shall never return,	  (Yet the heroes never surpass'd shall never return,
  Them that day I saw not.)	  Them that day I saw not.)	  Them that day I saw not.)	  Them that day I saw not.)
			
  I saw the interminable corps, I saw the processions of armies,	  I saw the interminable corps, I saw the processions of armies,	  I saw the interminable corps, I saw the processions of armies,	  I saw the interminable corps, I saw the processions of armies,
  I saw them approaching, defiling by with divisions,	  I saw them approaching, defiling by with divisions,	  I saw them approaching, defiling by with divisions,	  I saw them approaching, defiling by with divisions,
  Streaming northward, their work done, camping awhile in clusters of	  Streaming northward, their work done, camping awhile in clusters of	  Streaming northward, their work done, camping awhile in clusters of	  Streaming northward, their work done, camping awhile in clusters of
      mighty camps.	      mighty camps.	      mighty camps.	      mighty camps.
			
  No holiday soldiers--youthful, yet veterans,	  No holiday soldiers--youthful, yet veterans,	  No holiday soldiers--youthful, yet veterans,	  No holiday soldiers--youthful, yet veterans,
  Worn, swart, handsome, strong, of the stock of homestead and workshop,	  Worn, swart, handsome, strong, of the stock of homestead and workshop,	  Worn, swart, handsome, strong, of the stock of homestead and workshop,	  Worn, swart, handsome, strong, of the stock of homestead and workshop,
  Harden'd of many a long campaign and sweaty march,	  Harden'd of many a long campaign and sweaty march,	  Harden'd of many a long campaign and sweaty march,	  Harden'd of many a long campaign and sweaty march,
  Inured on many a hard-fought bloody field.	  Inured on many a hard-fought bloody field.	  Inured on many a hard-fought bloody field.	  Inured on many a hard-fought bloody field.
			
  A pause--the armies wait,	  A pause--the armies wait,	  A pause--the armies wait,	  A pause--the armies wait,
  A million flush'd embattled conquerors wait,	  A million flush'd embattled conquerors wait,	  A million flush'd embattled conquerors wait,	  A million flush'd embattled conquerors wait,
  The world too waits, then soft as breaking night and sure as dawn,	  The world too waits, then soft as breaking night and sure as dawn,	  The world too waits, then soft as breaking night and sure as dawn,	  The world too waits, then soft as breaking night and sure as dawn,
  They melt, they disappear.	  They melt, they disappear.	  They melt, they disappear.	  They melt, they disappear.
			
  Exult O lands! victorious lands!	  Exult O lands! victorious lands!	  Exult O lands! victorious lands!	  Exult O lands! victorious lands!
  Not there your victory on those red shuddering fields,	  Not there your victory on those red shuddering fields,	  Not there your victory on those red shuddering fields,	  Not there your victory on those red shuddering fields,
  But here and hence your victory.	  But here and hence your victory.	  But here and hence your victory.	  But here and hence your victory.
			
  Melt, melt away ye armies--disperse ye blue-clad soldiers,	  Melt, melt away ye armies--disperse ye blue-clad soldiers,	  Melt, melt away ye armies--disperse ye blue-clad soldiers,	  Melt, melt away ye armies--disperse ye blue-clad soldiers,
  Resolve ye back again, give up for good your deadly arms,	  Resolve ye back again, give up for good your deadly arms,	  Resolve ye back again, give up for good your deadly arms,	  Resolve ye back again, give up for good your deadly arms,
  Other the arms the fields henceforth for you, or South or North,	  Other the arms the fields henceforth for you, or South or North,	  Other the arms the fields henceforth for you, or South or North,	  Other the arms the fields henceforth for you, or South or North,
  With saner wars, sweet wars, life-giving wars.	  With saner wars, sweet wars, life-giving wars.	  With saner wars, sweet wars, life-giving wars.	  With saner wars, sweet wars, life-giving wars.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  Loud O my throat, and clear O soul!	  Loud O my throat, and clear O soul!	  Loud O my throat, and clear O soul!	  Loud O my throat, and clear O soul!
  The season of thanks and the voice of full-yielding,	  The season of thanks and the voice of full-yielding,	  The season of thanks and the voice of full-yielding,	  The season of thanks and the voice of full-yielding,
  The chant of joy and power for boundless fertility.	  The chant of joy and power for boundless fertility.	  The chant of joy and power for boundless fertility.	  The chant of joy and power for boundless fertility.
			
  All till'd and untill'd fields expand before me,	  All till'd and untill'd fields expand before me,	  All till'd and untill'd fields expand before me,	  All till'd and untill'd fields expand before me,
  I see the true arenas of my race, or first or last,	  I see the true arenas of my race, or first or last,	  I see the true arenas of my race, or first or last,	  I see the true arenas of my race, or first or last,
  Man's innocent and strong arenas.	  Man's innocent and strong arenas.	  Man's innocent and strong arenas.	  Man's innocent and strong arenas.
			
  I see the heroes at other toils,	  I see the heroes at other toils,	  I see the heroes at other toils,	  I see the heroes at other toils,
  I see well-wielded in their hands the better weapons.	  I see well-wielded in their hands the better weapons.	  I see well-wielded in their hands the better weapons.	  I see well-wielded in their hands the better weapons.
			
  I see where the Mother of All,	  I see where the Mother of All,	  I see where the Mother of All,	  I see where the Mother of All,
  With full-spanning eye gazes forth, dwells long,	  With full-spanning eye gazes forth, dwells long,	  With full-spanning eye gazes forth, dwells long,	  With full-spanning eye gazes forth, dwells long,
  And counts the varied gathering of the products.	  And counts the varied gathering of the products.	  And counts the varied gathering of the products.	  And counts the varied gathering of the products.
			
  Busy the far, the sunlit panorama,	  Busy the far, the sunlit panorama,	  Busy the far, the sunlit panorama,	  Busy the far, the sunlit panorama,
  Prairie, orchard, and yellow grain of the North,	  Prairie, orchard, and yellow grain of the North,	  Prairie, orchard, and yellow grain of the North,	  Prairie, orchard, and yellow grain of the North,
  Cotton and rice of the South and Louisianian cane,	  Cotton and rice of the South and Louisianian cane,	  Cotton and rice of the South and Louisianian cane,	  Cotton and rice of the South and Louisianian cane,
  Open unseeded fallows, rich fields of clover and timothy,	  Open unseeded fallows, rich fields of clover and timothy,	  Open unseeded fallows, rich fields of clover and timothy,	  Open unseeded fallows, rich fields of clover and timothy,
  Kine and horses feeding, and droves of sheep and swine,	  Kine and horses feeding, and droves of sheep and swine,	  Kine and horses feeding, and droves of sheep and swine,	  Kine and horses feeding, and droves of sheep and swine,
  And many a stately river flowing and many a jocund brook,	  And many a stately river flowing and many a jocund brook,	  And many a stately river flowing and many a jocund brook,	  And many a stately river flowing and many a jocund brook,
  And healthy uplands with herby-perfumed breezes,	  And healthy uplands with herby-perfumed breezes,	  And healthy uplands with herby-perfumed breezes,	  And healthy uplands with herby-perfumed breezes,
  And the good green grass, that delicate miracle the ever-recurring grass.	  And the good green grass, that delicate miracle the ever-recurring grass.	  And the good green grass, that delicate miracle the ever-recurring grass.	  And the good green grass, that delicate miracle the ever-recurring grass.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  Toil on heroes! harvest the products!	  Toil on heroes! harvest the products!	  Toil on heroes! harvest the products!	  Toil on heroes! harvest the products!
  Not alone on those warlike fields the Mother of All,	  Not alone on those warlike fields the Mother of All,	  Not alone on those warlike fields the Mother of All,	  Not alone on those warlike fields the Mother of All,
  With dilated form and lambent eyes watch'd you.	  With dilated form and lambent eyes watch'd you.	  With dilated form and lambent eyes watch'd you.	  With dilated form and lambent eyes watch'd you.
			
  Toil on heroes! toil well! handle the weapons well!	  Toil on heroes! toil well! handle the weapons well!	  Toil on heroes! toil well! handle the weapons well!	  Toil on heroes! toil well! handle the weapons well!
  The Mother of All, yet here as ever she watches you.	  The Mother of All, yet here as ever she watches you.	  The Mother of All, yet here as ever she watches you.	  The Mother of All, yet here as ever she watches you.
			
  Well-pleased America thou beholdest,	  Well-pleased America thou beholdest,	  Well-pleased America thou beholdest,	  Well-pleased America thou beholdest,
  Over the fields of the West those crawling monsters,	  Over the fields of the West those crawling monsters,	  Over the fields of the West those crawling monsters,	  Over the fields of the West those crawling monsters,
  The human-divine inventions, the labor-saving implements;	  The human-divine inventions, the labor-saving implements;	  The human-divine inventions, the labor-saving implements;	  The human-divine inventions, the labor-saving implements;
  Beholdest moving in every direction imbued as with life the	  Beholdest moving in every direction imbued as with life the	  Beholdest moving in every direction imbued as with life the	  Beholdest moving in every direction imbued as with life the
      revolving hay-rakes,	      revolving hay-rakes,	      revolving hay-rakes,	      revolving hay-rakes,
  The steam-power reaping-machines and the horse-power machines	  The steam-power reaping-machines and the horse-power machines	  The steam-power reaping-machines and the horse-power machines	  The steam-power reaping-machines and the horse-power machines
  The engines, thrashers of grain and cleaners of grain, well	  The engines, thrashers of grain and cleaners of grain, well	  The engines, thrashers of grain and cleaners of grain, well	  The engines, thrashers of grain and cleaners of grain, well
      separating the straw, the nimble work of the patent pitchfork,	      separating the straw, the nimble work of the patent pitchfork,	      separating the straw, the nimble work of the patent pitchfork,	      separating the straw, the nimble work of the patent pitchfork,
  Beholdest the newer saw-mill, the southern cotton-gin, and the	  Beholdest the newer saw-mill, the southern cotton-gin, and the	  Beholdest the newer saw-mill, the southern cotton-gin, and the	  Beholdest the newer saw-mill, the southern cotton-gin, and the
      rice-cleanser.	      rice-cleanser.	      rice-cleanser.	      rice-cleanser.
			
  Beneath thy look O Maternal,	  Beneath thy look O Maternal,	  Beneath thy look O Maternal,	  Beneath thy look O Maternal,
  With these and else and with their own strong hands the heroes harvest.	  With these and else and with their own strong hands the heroes harvest.	  With these and else and with their own strong hands the heroes harvest.	  With these and else and with their own strong hands the heroes harvest.
			
  All gather and all harvest,	  All gather and all harvest,	  All gather and all harvest,	  All gather and all harvest,
  Yet but for thee O Powerful, not a scythe might swing as now in security,	  Yet but for thee O Powerful, not a scythe might swing as now in security,	  Yet but for thee O Powerful, not a scythe might swing as now in security,	  Yet but for thee O Powerful, not a scythe might swing as now in security,
  Not a maize-stalk dangle as now its silken tassels in peace.	  Not a maize-stalk dangle as now its silken tassels in peace.	  Not a maize-stalk dangle as now its silken tassels in peace.	  Not a maize-stalk dangle as now its silken tassels in peace.
			
  Under thee only they harvest, even but a wisp of hay under thy great	  Under thee only they harvest, even but a wisp of hay under thy great	  Under thee only they harvest, even but a wisp of hay under thy great	  Under thee only they harvest, even but a wisp of hay under thy great
      face only,	      face only,	      face only,	      face only,
  Harvest the wheat of Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin, every barbed spear	  Harvest the wheat of Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin, every barbed spear	  Harvest the wheat of Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin, every barbed spear	  Harvest the wheat of Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin, every barbed spear
      under thee,	      under thee,	      under thee,	      under thee,
  Harvest the maize of Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, each ear in its	  Harvest the maize of Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, each ear in its	  Harvest the maize of Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, each ear in its	  Harvest the maize of Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, each ear in its
      light-green sheath,	      light-green sheath,	      light-green sheath,	      light-green sheath,
  Gather the hay to its myriad mows in the odorous tranquil barns,	  Gather the hay to its myriad mows in the odorous tranquil barns,	  Gather the hay to its myriad mows in the odorous tranquil barns,	  Gather the hay to its myriad mows in the odorous tranquil barns,
  Oats to their bins, the white potato, the buckwheat of Michigan, to theirs;	  Oats to their bins, the white potato, the buckwheat of Michigan, to theirs;	  Oats to their bins, the white potato, the buckwheat of Michigan, to theirs;	  Oats to their bins, the white potato, the buckwheat of Michigan, to theirs;
  Gather the cotton in Mississippi or Alabama, dig and hoard the	  Gather the cotton in Mississippi or Alabama, dig and hoard the	  Gather the cotton in Mississippi or Alabama, dig and hoard the	  Gather the cotton in Mississippi or Alabama, dig and hoard the
      golden the sweet potato of Georgia and the Carolinas,	      golden the sweet potato of Georgia and the Carolinas,	      golden the sweet potato of Georgia and the Carolinas,	      golden the sweet potato of Georgia and the Carolinas,
  Clip the wool of California or Pennsylvania,	  Clip the wool of California or Pennsylvania,	  Clip the wool of California or Pennsylvania,	  Clip the wool of California or Pennsylvania,
  Cut the flax in the Middle States, or hemp or tobacco in the Borders,	  Cut the flax in the Middle States, or hemp or tobacco in the Borders,	  Cut the flax in the Middle States, or hemp or tobacco in the Borders,	  Cut the flax in the Middle States, or hemp or tobacco in the Borders,
  Pick the pea and the bean, or pull apples from the trees or bunches	  Pick the pea and the bean, or pull apples from the trees or bunches	  Pick the pea and the bean, or pull apples from the trees or bunches	  Pick the pea and the bean, or pull apples from the trees or bunches
      of grapes from the vines,	      of grapes from the vines,	      of grapes from the vines,	      of grapes from the vines,
  Or aught that ripens in all these States or North or South,	  Or aught that ripens in all these States or North or South,	  Or aught that ripens in all these States or North or South,	  Or aught that ripens in all these States or North or South,
  Under the beaming sun and under thee.	  Under the beaming sun and under thee.	  Under the beaming sun and under thee.	  Under the beaming sun and under thee.
			
			
			
			
There Was a Child Went Forth	There Was a Child Went Forth	There Was a Child Went Forth	There Was a Child Went Forth
			
  There was a child went forth every day,	  There was a child went forth every day,	  There was a child went forth every day,	  There was a child went forth every day,
  And the first object he look'd upon, that object he became,	  And the first object he look'd upon, that object he became,	  And the first object he look'd upon, that object he became,	  And the first object he look'd upon, that object he became,
  And that object became part of him for the day or a certain part of the day,	  And that object became part of him for the day or a certain part of the day,	  And that object became part of him for the day or a certain part of the day,	  And that object became part of him for the day or a certain part of the day,
  Or for many years or stretching cycles of years.	  Or for many years or stretching cycles of years.	  Or for many years or stretching cycles of years.	  Or for many years or stretching cycles of years.
			
  The early lilacs became part of this child,	  The early lilacs became part of this child,	  The early lilacs became part of this child,	  The early lilacs became part of this child,
  And grass and white and red morning-glories, and white and red	  And grass and white and red morning-glories, and white and red	  And grass and white and red morning-glories, and white and red	  And grass and white and red morning-glories, and white and red
      clover, and the song of the phoebe-bird,	      clover, and the song of the phoebe-bird,	      clover, and the song of the phoebe-bird,	      clover, and the song of the phoebe-bird,
  And the Third-month lambs and the sow's pink-faint litter, and the	  And the Third-month lambs and the sow's pink-faint litter, and the	  And the Third-month lambs and the sow's pink-faint litter, and the	  And the Third-month lambs and the sow's pink-faint litter, and the
      mare's foal and the cow's calf,	      mare's foal and the cow's calf,	      mare's foal and the cow's calf,	      mare's foal and the cow's calf,
  And the noisy brood of the barnyard or by the mire of the pond-side,	  And the noisy brood of the barnyard or by the mire of the pond-side,	  And the noisy brood of the barnyard or by the mire of the pond-side,	  And the noisy brood of the barnyard or by the mire of the pond-side,
  And the fish suspending themselves so curiously below there, and the	  And the fish suspending themselves so curiously below there, and the	  And the fish suspending themselves so curiously below there, and the	  And the fish suspending themselves so curiously below there, and the
      beautiful curious liquid,	      beautiful curious liquid,	      beautiful curious liquid,	      beautiful curious liquid,
  And the water-plants with their graceful flat heads, all became part of him.	  And the water-plants with their graceful flat heads, all became part of him.	  And the water-plants with their graceful flat heads, all became part of him.	  And the water-plants with their graceful flat heads, all became part of him.
			
  The field-sprouts of Fourth-month and Fifth-month became part of him,	  The field-sprouts of Fourth-month and Fifth-month became part of him,	  The field-sprouts of Fourth-month and Fifth-month became part of him,	  The field-sprouts of Fourth-month and Fifth-month became part of him,
  Winter-grain sprouts and those of the light-yellow corn, and the	  Winter-grain sprouts and those of the light-yellow corn, and the	  Winter-grain sprouts and those of the light-yellow corn, and the	  Winter-grain sprouts and those of the light-yellow corn, and the
      esculent roots of the garden,	      esculent roots of the garden,	      esculent roots of the garden,	      esculent roots of the garden,
  And the apple-trees cover'd with blossoms and the fruit afterward,	  And the apple-trees cover'd with blossoms and the fruit afterward,	  And the apple-trees cover'd with blossoms and the fruit afterward,	  And the apple-trees cover'd with blossoms and the fruit afterward,
      and wood-berries, and the commonest weeds by the road,	      and wood-berries, and the commonest weeds by the road,	      and wood-berries, and the commonest weeds by the road,	      and wood-berries, and the commonest weeds by the road,
  And the old drunkard staggering home from the outhouse of the	  And the old drunkard staggering home from the outhouse of the	  And the old drunkard staggering home from the outhouse of the	  And the old drunkard staggering home from the outhouse of the
      tavern whence he had lately risen,	      tavern whence he had lately risen,	      tavern whence he had lately risen,	      tavern whence he had lately risen,
  And the schoolmistress that pass'd on her way to the school,	  And the schoolmistress that pass'd on her way to the school,	  And the schoolmistress that pass'd on her way to the school,	  And the schoolmistress that pass'd on her way to the school,
  And the friendly boys that pass'd, and the quarrelsome boys,	  And the friendly boys that pass'd, and the quarrelsome boys,	  And the friendly boys that pass'd, and the quarrelsome boys,	  And the friendly boys that pass'd, and the quarrelsome boys,
  And the tidy and fresh-cheek'd girls, and the barefoot negro boy and girl,	  And the tidy and fresh-cheek'd girls, and the barefoot negro boy and girl,	  And the tidy and fresh-cheek'd girls, and the barefoot negro boy and girl,	  And the tidy and fresh-cheek'd girls, and the barefoot negro boy and girl,
  And all the changes of city and country wherever he went.	  And all the changes of city and country wherever he went.	  And all the changes of city and country wherever he went.	  And all the changes of city and country wherever he went.
			
  His own parents, he that had father'd him and she that had conceiv'd	  His own parents, he that had father'd him and she that had conceiv'd	  His own parents, he that had father'd him and she that had conceiv'd	  His own parents, he that had father'd him and she that had conceiv'd
      him in her womb and birth'd him,	      him in her womb and birth'd him,	      him in her womb and birth'd him,	      him in her womb and birth'd him,
  They gave this child more of themselves than that,	  They gave this child more of themselves than that,	  They gave this child more of themselves than that,	  They gave this child more of themselves than that,
  They gave him afterward every day, they became part of him.	  They gave him afterward every day, they became part of him.	  They gave him afterward every day, they became part of him.	  They gave him afterward every day, they became part of him.
			
  The mother at home quietly placing the dishes on the supper-table,	  The mother at home quietly placing the dishes on the supper-table,	  The mother at home quietly placing the dishes on the supper-table,	  The mother at home quietly placing the dishes on the supper-table,
  The mother with mild words, clean her cap and gown, a wholesome	  The mother with mild words, clean her cap and gown, a wholesome	  The mother with mild words, clean her cap and gown, a wholesome	  The mother with mild words, clean her cap and gown, a wholesome
      odor falling off her person and clothes as she walks by,	      odor falling off her person and clothes as she walks by,	      odor falling off her person and clothes as she walks by,	      odor falling off her person and clothes as she walks by,
  The father, strong, self-sufficient, manly, mean, anger'd, unjust,	  The father, strong, self-sufficient, manly, mean, anger'd, unjust,	  The father, strong, self-sufficient, manly, mean, anger'd, unjust,	  The father, strong, self-sufficient, manly, mean, anger'd, unjust,
  The blow, the quick loud word, the tight bargain, the crafty lure,	  The blow, the quick loud word, the tight bargain, the crafty lure,	  The blow, the quick loud word, the tight bargain, the crafty lure,	  The blow, the quick loud word, the tight bargain, the crafty lure,
  The family usages, the language, the company, the furniture, the	  The family usages, the language, the company, the furniture, the	  The family usages, the language, the company, the furniture, the	  The family usages, the language, the company, the furniture, the
      yearning and swelling heart,	      yearning and swelling heart,	      yearning and swelling heart,	      yearning and swelling heart,
  Affection that will not be gainsay'd, the sense of what is real, the	  Affection that will not be gainsay'd, the sense of what is real, the	  Affection that will not be gainsay'd, the sense of what is real, the	  Affection that will not be gainsay'd, the sense of what is real, the
      thought if after all it should prove unreal,	      thought if after all it should prove unreal,	      thought if after all it should prove unreal,	      thought if after all it should prove unreal,
  The doubts of day-time and the doubts of night-time, the curious	  The doubts of day-time and the doubts of night-time, the curious	  The doubts of day-time and the doubts of night-time, the curious	  The doubts of day-time and the doubts of night-time, the curious
      whether and how,	      whether and how,	      whether and how,	      whether and how,
  Whether that which appears so is so, or is it all flashes and specks?	  Whether that which appears so is so, or is it all flashes and specks?	  Whether that which appears so is so, or is it all flashes and specks?	  Whether that which appears so is so, or is it all flashes and specks?
  Men and women crowding fast in the streets, if they are not flashes	  Men and women crowding fast in the streets, if they are not flashes	  Men and women crowding fast in the streets, if they are not flashes	  Men and women crowding fast in the streets, if they are not flashes
      and specks what are they?	      and specks what are they?	      and specks what are they?	      and specks what are they?
  The streets themselves and the facades of houses, and goods in the windows,	  The streets themselves and the facades of houses, and goods in the windows,	  The streets themselves and the facades of houses, and goods in the windows,	  The streets themselves and the facades of houses, and goods in the windows,
  Vehicles, teams, the heavy-plank'd wharves, the huge crossing at	  Vehicles, teams, the heavy-plank'd wharves, the huge crossing at	  Vehicles, teams, the heavy-plank'd wharves, the huge crossing at	  Vehicles, teams, the heavy-plank'd wharves, the huge crossing at
      the ferries,	      the ferries,	      the ferries,	      the ferries,
  The village on the highland seen from afar at sunset, the river between,	  The village on the highland seen from afar at sunset, the river between,	  The village on the highland seen from afar at sunset, the river between,	  The village on the highland seen from afar at sunset, the river between,
  Shadows, aureola and mist, the light falling on roofs and gables of	  Shadows, aureola and mist, the light falling on roofs and gables of	  Shadows, aureola and mist, the light falling on roofs and gables of	  Shadows, aureola and mist, the light falling on roofs and gables of
      white or brown two miles off,	      white or brown two miles off,	      white or brown two miles off,	      white or brown two miles off,
  The schooner near by sleepily dropping down the tide, the little	  The schooner near by sleepily dropping down the tide, the little	  The schooner near by sleepily dropping down the tide, the little	  The schooner near by sleepily dropping down the tide, the little
      boat slack-tow'd astern,	      boat slack-tow'd astern,	      boat slack-tow'd astern,	      boat slack-tow'd astern,
  The hurrying tumbling waves, quick-broken crests, slapping,	  The hurrying tumbling waves, quick-broken crests, slapping,	  The hurrying tumbling waves, quick-broken crests, slapping,	  The hurrying tumbling waves, quick-broken crests, slapping,
  The strata of color'd clouds, the long bar of maroon-tint away	  The strata of color'd clouds, the long bar of maroon-tint away	  The strata of color'd clouds, the long bar of maroon-tint away	  The strata of color'd clouds, the long bar of maroon-tint away
      solitary by itself, the spread of purity it lies motionless in,	      solitary by itself, the spread of purity it lies motionless in,	      solitary by itself, the spread of purity it lies motionless in,	      solitary by itself, the spread of purity it lies motionless in,
  The horizon's edge, the flying sea-crow, the fragrance of salt marsh	  The horizon's edge, the flying sea-crow, the fragrance of salt marsh	  The horizon's edge, the flying sea-crow, the fragrance of salt marsh	  The horizon's edge, the flying sea-crow, the fragrance of salt marsh
      and shore mud,	      and shore mud,	      and shore mud,	      and shore mud,
  These became part of that child who went forth every day, and who	  These became part of that child who went forth every day, and who	  These became part of that child who went forth every day, and who	  These became part of that child who went forth every day, and who
      now goes, and will always go forth every day.	      now goes, and will always go forth every day.	      now goes, and will always go forth every day.	      now goes, and will always go forth every day.
			
			
			
			
Old Ireland	Old Ireland	Old Ireland	Old Ireland
			
  Far hence amid an isle of wondrous beauty,	  Far hence amid an isle of wondrous beauty,	  Far hence amid an isle of wondrous beauty,	  Far hence amid an isle of wondrous beauty,
  Crouching over a grave an ancient sorrowful mother,	  Crouching over a grave an ancient sorrowful mother,	  Crouching over a grave an ancient sorrowful mother,	  Crouching over a grave an ancient sorrowful mother,
  Once a queen, now lean and tatter'd seated on the ground,	  Once a queen, now lean and tatter'd seated on the ground,	  Once a queen, now lean and tatter'd seated on the ground,	  Once a queen, now lean and tatter'd seated on the ground,
  Her old white hair drooping dishevel'd round her shoulders,	  Her old white hair drooping dishevel'd round her shoulders,	  Her old white hair drooping dishevel'd round her shoulders,	  Her old white hair drooping dishevel'd round her shoulders,
  At her feet fallen an unused royal harp,	  At her feet fallen an unused royal harp,	  At her feet fallen an unused royal harp,	  At her feet fallen an unused royal harp,
  Long silent, she too long silent, mourning her shrouded hope and heir,	  Long silent, she too long silent, mourning her shrouded hope and heir,	  Long silent, she too long silent, mourning her shrouded hope and heir,	  Long silent, she too long silent, mourning her shrouded hope and heir,
  Of all the earth her heart most full of sorrow because most full of love.	  Of all the earth her heart most full of sorrow because most full of love.	  Of all the earth her heart most full of sorrow because most full of love.	  Of all the earth her heart most full of sorrow because most full of love.
			
  Yet a word ancient mother,	  Yet a word ancient mother,	  Yet a word ancient mother,	  Yet a word ancient mother,
  You need crouch there no longer on the cold ground with forehead	  You need crouch there no longer on the cold ground with forehead	  You need crouch there no longer on the cold ground with forehead	  You need crouch there no longer on the cold ground with forehead
      between your knees,	      between your knees,	      between your knees,	      between your knees,
  O you need not sit there veil'd in your old white hair so dishevel'd,	  O you need not sit there veil'd in your old white hair so dishevel'd,	  O you need not sit there veil'd in your old white hair so dishevel'd,	  O you need not sit there veil'd in your old white hair so dishevel'd,
  For know you the one you mourn is not in that grave,	  For know you the one you mourn is not in that grave,	  For know you the one you mourn is not in that grave,	  For know you the one you mourn is not in that grave,
  It was an illusion, the son you love was not really dead,	  It was an illusion, the son you love was not really dead,	  It was an illusion, the son you love was not really dead,	  It was an illusion, the son you love was not really dead,
  The Lord is not dead, he is risen again young and strong in another country,	  The Lord is not dead, he is risen again young and strong in another country,	  The Lord is not dead, he is risen again young and strong in another country,	  The Lord is not dead, he is risen again young and strong in another country,
  Even while you wept there by your fallen harp by the grave,	  Even while you wept there by your fallen harp by the grave,	  Even while you wept there by your fallen harp by the grave,	  Even while you wept there by your fallen harp by the grave,
  What you wept for was translated, pass'd from the grave,	  What you wept for was translated, pass'd from the grave,	  What you wept for was translated, pass'd from the grave,	  What you wept for was translated, pass'd from the grave,
  The winds favor'd and the sea sail'd it,	  The winds favor'd and the sea sail'd it,	  The winds favor'd and the sea sail'd it,	  The winds favor'd and the sea sail'd it,
  And now with rosy and new blood,	  And now with rosy and new blood,	  And now with rosy and new blood,	  And now with rosy and new blood,
  Moves to-day in a new country.	  Moves to-day in a new country.	  Moves to-day in a new country.	  Moves to-day in a new country.
			
			
			
			
The City Dead-House	The City Dead-House	The City Dead-House	The City Dead-House
			
  By the city dead-house by the gate,	  By the city dead-house by the gate,	  By the city dead-house by the gate,	  By the city dead-house by the gate,
  As idly sauntering wending my way from the clangor,	  As idly sauntering wending my way from the clangor,	  As idly sauntering wending my way from the clangor,	  As idly sauntering wending my way from the clangor,
  I curious pause, for lo, an outcast form, a poor dead prostitute brought,	  I curious pause, for lo, an outcast form, a poor dead prostitute brought,	  I curious pause, for lo, an outcast form, a poor dead prostitute brought,	  I curious pause, for lo, an outcast form, a poor dead prostitute brought,
  Her corpse they deposit unclaim'd, it lies on the damp brick pavement,	  Her corpse they deposit unclaim'd, it lies on the damp brick pavement,	  Her corpse they deposit unclaim'd, it lies on the damp brick pavement,	  Her corpse they deposit unclaim'd, it lies on the damp brick pavement,
  The divine woman, her body, I see the body, I look on it alone,	  The divine woman, her body, I see the body, I look on it alone,	  The divine woman, her body, I see the body, I look on it alone,	  The divine woman, her body, I see the body, I look on it alone,
  That house once full of passion and beauty, all else I notice not,	  That house once full of passion and beauty, all else I notice not,	  That house once full of passion and beauty, all else I notice not,	  That house once full of passion and beauty, all else I notice not,
  Nor stillness so cold, nor running water from faucet, nor odors	  Nor stillness so cold, nor running water from faucet, nor odors	  Nor stillness so cold, nor running water from faucet, nor odors	  Nor stillness so cold, nor running water from faucet, nor odors
      morbific impress me,	      morbific impress me,	      morbific impress me,	      morbific impress me,
  But the house alone--that wondrous house--that delicate fair house	  But the house alone--that wondrous house--that delicate fair house	  But the house alone--that wondrous house--that delicate fair house	  But the house alone--that wondrous house--that delicate fair house
      --that ruin!	      --that ruin!	      --that ruin!	      --that ruin!
  That immortal house more than all the rows of dwellings ever built!	  That immortal house more than all the rows of dwellings ever built!	  That immortal house more than all the rows of dwellings ever built!	  That immortal house more than all the rows of dwellings ever built!
  Or white-domed capitol with majestic figure surmounted, or all the	  Or white-domed capitol with majestic figure surmounted, or all the	  Or white-domed capitol with majestic figure surmounted, or all the	  Or white-domed capitol with majestic figure surmounted, or all the
      old high-spired cathedrals,	      old high-spired cathedrals,	      old high-spired cathedrals,	      old high-spired cathedrals,
  That little house alone more than them all--poor, desperate house!	  That little house alone more than them all--poor, desperate house!	  That little house alone more than them all--poor, desperate house!	  That little house alone more than them all--poor, desperate house!
  Fair, fearful wreck--tenement of a soul--itself a soul,	  Fair, fearful wreck--tenement of a soul--itself a soul,	  Fair, fearful wreck--tenement of a soul--itself a soul,	  Fair, fearful wreck--tenement of a soul--itself a soul,
  Unclaim'd, avoided house--take one breath from my tremulous lips,	  Unclaim'd, avoided house--take one breath from my tremulous lips,	  Unclaim'd, avoided house--take one breath from my tremulous lips,	  Unclaim'd, avoided house--take one breath from my tremulous lips,
  Take one tear dropt aside as I go for thought of you,	  Take one tear dropt aside as I go for thought of you,	  Take one tear dropt aside as I go for thought of you,	  Take one tear dropt aside as I go for thought of you,
  Dead house of love--house of madness and sin, crumbled, crush'd,	  Dead house of love--house of madness and sin, crumbled, crush'd,	  Dead house of love--house of madness and sin, crumbled, crush'd,	  Dead house of love--house of madness and sin, crumbled, crush'd,
  House of life, erewhile talking and laughing--but ah, poor house,	  House of life, erewhile talking and laughing--but ah, poor house,	  House of life, erewhile talking and laughing--but ah, poor house,	  House of life, erewhile talking and laughing--but ah, poor house,
      dead even then,	      dead even then,	      dead even then,	      dead even then,
  Months, years, an echoing, garnish'd house--but dead, dead, dead.	  Months, years, an echoing, garnish'd house--but dead, dead, dead.	  Months, years, an echoing, garnish'd house--but dead, dead, dead.	  Months, years, an echoing, garnish'd house--but dead, dead, dead.
			
			
			
			
This Compost	This Compost	This Compost	This Compost
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Something startles me where I thought I was safest,	  Something startles me where I thought I was safest,	  Something startles me where I thought I was safest,	  Something startles me where I thought I was safest,
  I withdraw from the still woods I loved,	  I withdraw from the still woods I loved,	  I withdraw from the still woods I loved,	  I withdraw from the still woods I loved,
  I will not go now on the pastures to walk,	  I will not go now on the pastures to walk,	  I will not go now on the pastures to walk,	  I will not go now on the pastures to walk,
  I will not strip the clothes from my body to meet my lover the sea,	  I will not strip the clothes from my body to meet my lover the sea,	  I will not strip the clothes from my body to meet my lover the sea,	  I will not strip the clothes from my body to meet my lover the sea,
  I will not touch my flesh to the earth as to other flesh to renew me.	  I will not touch my flesh to the earth as to other flesh to renew me.	  I will not touch my flesh to the earth as to other flesh to renew me.	  I will not touch my flesh to the earth as to other flesh to renew me.
			
  O how can it be that the ground itself does not sicken?	  O how can it be that the ground itself does not sicken?	  O how can it be that the ground itself does not sicken?	  O how can it be that the ground itself does not sicken?
  How can you be alive you growths of spring?	  How can you be alive you growths of spring?	  How can you be alive you growths of spring?	  How can you be alive you growths of spring?
  How can you furnish health you blood of herbs, roots, orchards, grain?	  How can you furnish health you blood of herbs, roots, orchards, grain?	  How can you furnish health you blood of herbs, roots, orchards, grain?	  How can you furnish health you blood of herbs, roots, orchards, grain?
  Are they not continually putting distemper'd corpses within you?	  Are they not continually putting distemper'd corpses within you?	  Are they not continually putting distemper'd corpses within you?	  Are they not continually putting distemper'd corpses within you?
  Is not every continent work'd over and over with sour dead?	  Is not every continent work'd over and over with sour dead?	  Is not every continent work'd over and over with sour dead?	  Is not every continent work'd over and over with sour dead?
			
  Where have you disposed of their carcasses?	  Where have you disposed of their carcasses?	  Where have you disposed of their carcasses?	  Where have you disposed of their carcasses?
  Those drunkards and gluttons of so many generations?	  Those drunkards and gluttons of so many generations?	  Those drunkards and gluttons of so many generations?	  Those drunkards and gluttons of so many generations?
  Where have you drawn off all the foul liquid and meat?	  Where have you drawn off all the foul liquid and meat?	  Where have you drawn off all the foul liquid and meat?	  Where have you drawn off all the foul liquid and meat?
  I do not see any of it upon you to-day, or perhaps I am deceiv'd,	  I do not see any of it upon you to-day, or perhaps I am deceiv'd,	  I do not see any of it upon you to-day, or perhaps I am deceiv'd,	  I do not see any of it upon you to-day, or perhaps I am deceiv'd,
  I will run a furrow with my plough, I will press my spade through	  I will run a furrow with my plough, I will press my spade through	  I will run a furrow with my plough, I will press my spade through	  I will run a furrow with my plough, I will press my spade through
      the sod and turn it up underneath,	      the sod and turn it up underneath,	      the sod and turn it up underneath,	      the sod and turn it up underneath,
  I am sure I shall expose some of the foul meat.	  I am sure I shall expose some of the foul meat.	  I am sure I shall expose some of the foul meat.	  I am sure I shall expose some of the foul meat.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Behold this compost! behold it well!	  Behold this compost! behold it well!	  Behold this compost! behold it well!	  Behold this compost! behold it well!
  Perhaps every mite has once form'd part of a sick person--yet behold!	  Perhaps every mite has once form'd part of a sick person--yet behold!	  Perhaps every mite has once form'd part of a sick person--yet behold!	  Perhaps every mite has once form'd part of a sick person--yet behold!
  The grass of spring covers the prairies,	  The grass of spring covers the prairies,	  The grass of spring covers the prairies,	  The grass of spring covers the prairies,
  The bean bursts noiselessly through the mould in the garden,	  The bean bursts noiselessly through the mould in the garden,	  The bean bursts noiselessly through the mould in the garden,	  The bean bursts noiselessly through the mould in the garden,
  The delicate spear of the onion pierces upward,	  The delicate spear of the onion pierces upward,	  The delicate spear of the onion pierces upward,	  The delicate spear of the onion pierces upward,
  The apple-buds cluster together on the apple-branches,	  The apple-buds cluster together on the apple-branches,	  The apple-buds cluster together on the apple-branches,	  The apple-buds cluster together on the apple-branches,
  The resurrection of the wheat appears with pale visage out of its graves,	  The resurrection of the wheat appears with pale visage out of its graves,	  The resurrection of the wheat appears with pale visage out of its graves,	  The resurrection of the wheat appears with pale visage out of its graves,
  The tinge awakes over the willow-tree and the mulberry-tree,	  The tinge awakes over the willow-tree and the mulberry-tree,	  The tinge awakes over the willow-tree and the mulberry-tree,	  The tinge awakes over the willow-tree and the mulberry-tree,
  The he-birds carol mornings and evenings while the she-birds sit on	  The he-birds carol mornings and evenings while the she-birds sit on	  The he-birds carol mornings and evenings while the she-birds sit on	  The he-birds carol mornings and evenings while the she-birds sit on
      their nests,	      their nests,	      their nests,	      their nests,
  The young of poultry break through the hatch'd eggs,	  The young of poultry break through the hatch'd eggs,	  The young of poultry break through the hatch'd eggs,	  The young of poultry break through the hatch'd eggs,
  The new-born of animals appear, the calf is dropt from the cow, the	  The new-born of animals appear, the calf is dropt from the cow, the	  The new-born of animals appear, the calf is dropt from the cow, the	  The new-born of animals appear, the calf is dropt from the cow, the
      colt from the mare,	      colt from the mare,	      colt from the mare,	      colt from the mare,
  Out of its little hill faithfully rise the potato's dark green leaves,	  Out of its little hill faithfully rise the potato's dark green leaves,	  Out of its little hill faithfully rise the potato's dark green leaves,	  Out of its little hill faithfully rise the potato's dark green leaves,
  Out of its hill rises the yellow maize-stalk, the lilacs bloom in	  Out of its hill rises the yellow maize-stalk, the lilacs bloom in	  Out of its hill rises the yellow maize-stalk, the lilacs bloom in	  Out of its hill rises the yellow maize-stalk, the lilacs bloom in
      the dooryards,	      the dooryards,	      the dooryards,	      the dooryards,
  The summer growth is innocent and disdainful above all those strata	  The summer growth is innocent and disdainful above all those strata	  The summer growth is innocent and disdainful above all those strata	  The summer growth is innocent and disdainful above all those strata
      of sour dead.	      of sour dead.	      of sour dead.	      of sour dead.
			
  What chemistry!	  What chemistry!	  What chemistry!	  What chemistry!
  That the winds are really not infectious,	  That the winds are really not infectious,	  That the winds are really not infectious,	  That the winds are really not infectious,
  That this is no cheat, this transparent green-wash of the sea which	  That this is no cheat, this transparent green-wash of the sea which	  That this is no cheat, this transparent green-wash of the sea which	  That this is no cheat, this transparent green-wash of the sea which
      is so amorous after me,	      is so amorous after me,	      is so amorous after me,	      is so amorous after me,
  That it is safe to allow it to lick my naked body all over with its tongues,	  That it is safe to allow it to lick my naked body all over with its tongues,	  That it is safe to allow it to lick my naked body all over with its tongues,	  That it is safe to allow it to lick my naked body all over with its tongues,
  That it will not endanger me with the fevers that have deposited	  That it will not endanger me with the fevers that have deposited	  That it will not endanger me with the fevers that have deposited	  That it will not endanger me with the fevers that have deposited
      themselves in it,	      themselves in it,	      themselves in it,	      themselves in it,
  That all is clean forever and forever,	  That all is clean forever and forever,	  That all is clean forever and forever,	  That all is clean forever and forever,
  That the cool drink from the well tastes so good,	  That the cool drink from the well tastes so good,	  That the cool drink from the well tastes so good,	  That the cool drink from the well tastes so good,
  That blackberries are so flavorous and juicy,	  That blackberries are so flavorous and juicy,	  That blackberries are so flavorous and juicy,	  That blackberries are so flavorous and juicy,
  That the fruits of the apple-orchard and the orange-orchard, that	  That the fruits of the apple-orchard and the orange-orchard, that	  That the fruits of the apple-orchard and the orange-orchard, that	  That the fruits of the apple-orchard and the orange-orchard, that
      melons, grapes, peaches, plums, will none of them poison me,	      melons, grapes, peaches, plums, will none of them poison me,	      melons, grapes, peaches, plums, will none of them poison me,	      melons, grapes, peaches, plums, will none of them poison me,
  That when I recline on the grass I do not catch any disease,	  That when I recline on the grass I do not catch any disease,	  That when I recline on the grass I do not catch any disease,	  That when I recline on the grass I do not catch any disease,
  Though probably every spear of grass rises out of what was once	  Though probably every spear of grass rises out of what was once	  Though probably every spear of grass rises out of what was once	  Though probably every spear of grass rises out of what was once
      catching disease.	      catching disease.	      catching disease.	      catching disease.
			
  Now I am terrified at the Earth, it is that calm and patient,	  Now I am terrified at the Earth, it is that calm and patient,	  Now I am terrified at the Earth, it is that calm and patient,	  Now I am terrified at the Earth, it is that calm and patient,
  It grows such sweet things out of such corruptions,	  It grows such sweet things out of such corruptions,	  It grows such sweet things out of such corruptions,	  It grows such sweet things out of such corruptions,
  It turns harmless and stainless on its axis, with such endless	  It turns harmless and stainless on its axis, with such endless	  It turns harmless and stainless on its axis, with such endless	  It turns harmless and stainless on its axis, with such endless
      successions of diseas'd corpses,	      successions of diseas'd corpses,	      successions of diseas'd corpses,	      successions of diseas'd corpses,
  It distills such exquisite winds out of such infused fetor,	  It distills such exquisite winds out of such infused fetor,	  It distills such exquisite winds out of such infused fetor,	  It distills such exquisite winds out of such infused fetor,
  It renews with such unwitting looks its prodigal, annual, sumptuous crops,	  It renews with such unwitting looks its prodigal, annual, sumptuous crops,	  It renews with such unwitting looks its prodigal, annual, sumptuous crops,	  It renews with such unwitting looks its prodigal, annual, sumptuous crops,
  It gives such divine materials to men, and accepts such leavings	  It gives such divine materials to men, and accepts such leavings	  It gives such divine materials to men, and accepts such leavings	  It gives such divine materials to men, and accepts such leavings
      from them at last.	      from them at last.	      from them at last.	      from them at last.
			
			
			
			
To a Foil'd European Revolutionaire	To a Foil'd European Revolutionaire	To a Foil'd European Revolutionaire	To a Foil'd European Revolutionaire
			
  Courage yet, my brother or my sister!	  Courage yet, my brother or my sister!	  Courage yet, my brother or my sister!	  Courage yet, my brother or my sister!
  Keep on--Liberty is to be subserv'd whatever occurs;	  Keep on--Liberty is to be subserv'd whatever occurs;	  Keep on--Liberty is to be subserv'd whatever occurs;	  Keep on--Liberty is to be subserv'd whatever occurs;
  That is nothing that is quell'd by one or two failures, or any	  That is nothing that is quell'd by one or two failures, or any	  That is nothing that is quell'd by one or two failures, or any	  That is nothing that is quell'd by one or two failures, or any
      number of failures,	      number of failures,	      number of failures,	      number of failures,
  Or by the indifference or ingratitude of the people, or by any	  Or by the indifference or ingratitude of the people, or by any	  Or by the indifference or ingratitude of the people, or by any	  Or by the indifference or ingratitude of the people, or by any
      unfaithfulness,	      unfaithfulness,	      unfaithfulness,	      unfaithfulness,
  Or the show of the tushes of power, soldiers, cannon, penal statutes.	  Or the show of the tushes of power, soldiers, cannon, penal statutes.	  Or the show of the tushes of power, soldiers, cannon, penal statutes.	  Or the show of the tushes of power, soldiers, cannon, penal statutes.
			
  What we believe in waits latent forever through all the continents,	  What we believe in waits latent forever through all the continents,	  What we believe in waits latent forever through all the continents,	  What we believe in waits latent forever through all the continents,
  Invites no one, promises nothing, sits in calmness and light, is	  Invites no one, promises nothing, sits in calmness and light, is	  Invites no one, promises nothing, sits in calmness and light, is	  Invites no one, promises nothing, sits in calmness and light, is
      positive and composed, knows no discouragement,	      positive and composed, knows no discouragement,	      positive and composed, knows no discouragement,	      positive and composed, knows no discouragement,
  Waiting patiently, waiting its time.	  Waiting patiently, waiting its time.	  Waiting patiently, waiting its time.	  Waiting patiently, waiting its time.
			
  (Not songs of loyalty alone are these,	  (Not songs of loyalty alone are these,	  (Not songs of loyalty alone are these,	  (Not songs of loyalty alone are these,
  But songs of insurrection also,	  But songs of insurrection also,	  But songs of insurrection also,	  But songs of insurrection also,
  For I am the sworn poet of every dauntless rebel the world over,	  For I am the sworn poet of every dauntless rebel the world over,	  For I am the sworn poet of every dauntless rebel the world over,	  For I am the sworn poet of every dauntless rebel the world over,
  And he going with me leaves peace and routine behind him,	  And he going with me leaves peace and routine behind him,	  And he going with me leaves peace and routine behind him,	  And he going with me leaves peace and routine behind him,
  And stakes his life to be lost at any moment.)	  And stakes his life to be lost at any moment.)	  And stakes his life to be lost at any moment.)	  And stakes his life to be lost at any moment.)
			
  The battle rages with many a loud alarm and frequent advance and retreat,	  The battle rages with many a loud alarm and frequent advance and retreat,	  The battle rages with many a loud alarm and frequent advance and retreat,	  The battle rages with many a loud alarm and frequent advance and retreat,
  The infidel triumphs, or supposes he triumphs,	  The infidel triumphs, or supposes he triumphs,	  The infidel triumphs, or supposes he triumphs,	  The infidel triumphs, or supposes he triumphs,
  The prison, scaffold, garrote, handcuffs, iron necklace and	  The prison, scaffold, garrote, handcuffs, iron necklace and	  The prison, scaffold, garrote, handcuffs, iron necklace and	  The prison, scaffold, garrote, handcuffs, iron necklace and
      leadballs do their work,	      leadballs do their work,	      leadballs do their work,	      leadballs do their work,
  The named and unnamed heroes pass to other spheres,	  The named and unnamed heroes pass to other spheres,	  The named and unnamed heroes pass to other spheres,	  The named and unnamed heroes pass to other spheres,
  The great speakers and writers are exiled, they lie sick in distant lands,	  The great speakers and writers are exiled, they lie sick in distant lands,	  The great speakers and writers are exiled, they lie sick in distant lands,	  The great speakers and writers are exiled, they lie sick in distant lands,
  The cause is asleep, the strongest throats are choked with their own blood,	  The cause is asleep, the strongest throats are choked with their own blood,	  The cause is asleep, the strongest throats are choked with their own blood,	  The cause is asleep, the strongest throats are choked with their own blood,
  The young men droop their eyelashes toward the ground when they meet;	  The young men droop their eyelashes toward the ground when they meet;	  The young men droop their eyelashes toward the ground when they meet;	  The young men droop their eyelashes toward the ground when they meet;
  But for all this Liberty has not gone out of the place, nor the	  But for all this Liberty has not gone out of the place, nor the	  But for all this Liberty has not gone out of the place, nor the	  But for all this Liberty has not gone out of the place, nor the
      infidel enter'd into full possession.	      infidel enter'd into full possession.	      infidel enter'd into full possession.	      infidel enter'd into full possession.
			
  When liberty goes out of a place it is not the first to go, nor the	  When liberty goes out of a place it is not the first to go, nor the	  When liberty goes out of a place it is not the first to go, nor the	  When liberty goes out of a place it is not the first to go, nor the
      second or third to go,	      second or third to go,	      second or third to go,	      second or third to go,
  It waits for all the rest to go, it is the last.	  It waits for all the rest to go, it is the last.	  It waits for all the rest to go, it is the last.	  It waits for all the rest to go, it is the last.
			
  When there are no more memories of heroes and martyrs,	  When there are no more memories of heroes and martyrs,	  When there are no more memories of heroes and martyrs,	  When there are no more memories of heroes and martyrs,
  And when all life and all the souls of men and women are discharged	  And when all life and all the souls of men and women are discharged	  And when all life and all the souls of men and women are discharged	  And when all life and all the souls of men and women are discharged
      from any part of the earth,	      from any part of the earth,	      from any part of the earth,	      from any part of the earth,
  Then only shall liberty or the idea of liberty be discharged from	  Then only shall liberty or the idea of liberty be discharged from	  Then only shall liberty or the idea of liberty be discharged from	  Then only shall liberty or the idea of liberty be discharged from
      that part of the earth,	      that part of the earth,	      that part of the earth,	      that part of the earth,
  And the infidel come into full possession.	  And the infidel come into full possession.	  And the infidel come into full possession.	  And the infidel come into full possession.
			
  Then courage European revolter, revoltress!	  Then courage European revolter, revoltress!	  Then courage European revolter, revoltress!	  Then courage European revolter, revoltress!
  For till all ceases neither must you cease.	  For till all ceases neither must you cease.	  For till all ceases neither must you cease.	  For till all ceases neither must you cease.
			
  I do not know what you are for, (I do not know what I am for myself,	  I do not know what you are for, (I do not know what I am for myself,	  I do not know what you are for, (I do not know what I am for myself,	  I do not know what you are for, (I do not know what I am for myself,
      nor what any thing is for,)	      nor what any thing is for,)	      nor what any thing is for,)	      nor what any thing is for,)
  But I will search carefully for it even in being foil'd,	  But I will search carefully for it even in being foil'd,	  But I will search carefully for it even in being foil'd,	  But I will search carefully for it even in being foil'd,
  In defeat, poverty, misconception, imprisonment--for they too are great.	  In defeat, poverty, misconception, imprisonment--for they too are great.	  In defeat, poverty, misconception, imprisonment--for they too are great.	  In defeat, poverty, misconception, imprisonment--for they too are great.
			
  Did we think victory great?	  Did we think victory great?	  Did we think victory great?	  Did we think victory great?
  So it is--but now it seems to me, when it cannot be help'd, that	  So it is--but now it seems to me, when it cannot be help'd, that	  So it is--but now it seems to me, when it cannot be help'd, that	  So it is--but now it seems to me, when it cannot be help'd, that
      defeat is great,	      defeat is great,	      defeat is great,	      defeat is great,
  And that death and dismay are great.	  And that death and dismay are great.	  And that death and dismay are great.	  And that death and dismay are great.
			
			
			
			
Unnamed Land	Unnamed Land	Unnamed Land	Unnamed Land
			
  Nations ten thousand years before these States, and many times ten	  Nations ten thousand years before these States, and many times ten	  Nations ten thousand years before these States, and many times ten	  Nations ten thousand years before these States, and many times ten
      thousand years before these States,	      thousand years before these States,	      thousand years before these States,	      thousand years before these States,
  Garner'd clusters of ages that men and women like us grew up and	  Garner'd clusters of ages that men and women like us grew up and	  Garner'd clusters of ages that men and women like us grew up and	  Garner'd clusters of ages that men and women like us grew up and
      travel'd their course and pass'd on,	      travel'd their course and pass'd on,	      travel'd their course and pass'd on,	      travel'd their course and pass'd on,
  What vast-built cities, what orderly republics, what pastoral tribes	  What vast-built cities, what orderly republics, what pastoral tribes	  What vast-built cities, what orderly republics, what pastoral tribes	  What vast-built cities, what orderly republics, what pastoral tribes
      and nomads,	      and nomads,	      and nomads,	      and nomads,
  What histories, rulers, heroes, perhaps transcending all others,	  What histories, rulers, heroes, perhaps transcending all others,	  What histories, rulers, heroes, perhaps transcending all others,	  What histories, rulers, heroes, perhaps transcending all others,
  What laws, customs, wealth, arts, traditions,	  What laws, customs, wealth, arts, traditions,	  What laws, customs, wealth, arts, traditions,	  What laws, customs, wealth, arts, traditions,
  What sort of marriage, what costumes, what physiology and phrenology,	  What sort of marriage, what costumes, what physiology and phrenology,	  What sort of marriage, what costumes, what physiology and phrenology,	  What sort of marriage, what costumes, what physiology and phrenology,
  What of liberty and slavery among them, what they thought of death	  What of liberty and slavery among them, what they thought of death	  What of liberty and slavery among them, what they thought of death	  What of liberty and slavery among them, what they thought of death
      and the soul,	      and the soul,	      and the soul,	      and the soul,
  Who were witty and wise, who beautiful and poetic, who brutish and	  Who were witty and wise, who beautiful and poetic, who brutish and	  Who were witty and wise, who beautiful and poetic, who brutish and	  Who were witty and wise, who beautiful and poetic, who brutish and
      undevelop'd,	      undevelop'd,	      undevelop'd,	      undevelop'd,
  Not a mark, not a record remains--and yet all remains.	  Not a mark, not a record remains--and yet all remains.	  Not a mark, not a record remains--and yet all remains.	  Not a mark, not a record remains--and yet all remains.
			
  O I know that those men and women were not for nothing, any more	  O I know that those men and women were not for nothing, any more	  O I know that those men and women were not for nothing, any more	  O I know that those men and women were not for nothing, any more
      than we are for nothing,	      than we are for nothing,	      than we are for nothing,	      than we are for nothing,
  I know that they belong to the scheme of the world every bit as much	  I know that they belong to the scheme of the world every bit as much	  I know that they belong to the scheme of the world every bit as much	  I know that they belong to the scheme of the world every bit as much
      as we now belong to it.	      as we now belong to it.	      as we now belong to it.	      as we now belong to it.
			
  Afar they stand, yet near to me they stand,	  Afar they stand, yet near to me they stand,	  Afar they stand, yet near to me they stand,	  Afar they stand, yet near to me they stand,
  Some with oval countenances learn'd and calm,	  Some with oval countenances learn'd and calm,	  Some with oval countenances learn'd and calm,	  Some with oval countenances learn'd and calm,
  Some naked and savage, some like huge collections of insects,	  Some naked and savage, some like huge collections of insects,	  Some naked and savage, some like huge collections of insects,	  Some naked and savage, some like huge collections of insects,
  Some in tents, herdsmen, patriarchs, tribes, horsemen,	  Some in tents, herdsmen, patriarchs, tribes, horsemen,	  Some in tents, herdsmen, patriarchs, tribes, horsemen,	  Some in tents, herdsmen, patriarchs, tribes, horsemen,
  Some prowling through woods, some living peaceably on farms,	  Some prowling through woods, some living peaceably on farms,	  Some prowling through woods, some living peaceably on farms,	  Some prowling through woods, some living peaceably on farms,
      laboring, reaping, filling barns,	      laboring, reaping, filling barns,	      laboring, reaping, filling barns,	      laboring, reaping, filling barns,
  Some traversing paved avenues, amid temples, palaces, factories,	  Some traversing paved avenues, amid temples, palaces, factories,	  Some traversing paved avenues, amid temples, palaces, factories,	  Some traversing paved avenues, amid temples, palaces, factories,
      libraries, shows, courts, theatres, wonderful monuments.	      libraries, shows, courts, theatres, wonderful monuments.	      libraries, shows, courts, theatres, wonderful monuments.	      libraries, shows, courts, theatres, wonderful monuments.
  Are those billions of men really gone?	  Are those billions of men really gone?	  Are those billions of men really gone?	  Are those billions of men really gone?
  Are those women of the old experience of the earth gone?	  Are those women of the old experience of the earth gone?	  Are those women of the old experience of the earth gone?	  Are those women of the old experience of the earth gone?
  Do their lives, cities, arts, rest only with us?	  Do their lives, cities, arts, rest only with us?	  Do their lives, cities, arts, rest only with us?	  Do their lives, cities, arts, rest only with us?
  Did they achieve nothing for good for themselves?	  Did they achieve nothing for good for themselves?	  Did they achieve nothing for good for themselves?	  Did they achieve nothing for good for themselves?
			
  I believe of all those men and women that fill'd the unnamed lands,	  I believe of all those men and women that fill'd the unnamed lands,	  I believe of all those men and women that fill'd the unnamed lands,	  I believe of all those men and women that fill'd the unnamed lands,
      every one exists this hour here or elsewhere, invisible to us.	      every one exists this hour here or elsewhere, invisible to us.	      every one exists this hour here or elsewhere, invisible to us.	      every one exists this hour here or elsewhere, invisible to us.
  In exact proportion to what he or she grew from in life, and out of	  In exact proportion to what he or she grew from in life, and out of	  In exact proportion to what he or she grew from in life, and out of	  In exact proportion to what he or she grew from in life, and out of
      what he or she did, felt, became, loved, sinn'd, in life.	      what he or she did, felt, became, loved, sinn'd, in life.	      what he or she did, felt, became, loved, sinn'd, in life.	      what he or she did, felt, became, loved, sinn'd, in life.
			
  I believe that was not the end of those nations or any person of	  I believe that was not the end of those nations or any person of	  I believe that was not the end of those nations or any person of	  I believe that was not the end of those nations or any person of
      them, any more than this shall be the end of my nation, or of me;	      them, any more than this shall be the end of my nation, or of me;	      them, any more than this shall be the end of my nation, or of me;	      them, any more than this shall be the end of my nation, or of me;
  Of their languages, governments, marriage, literature, products,	  Of their languages, governments, marriage, literature, products,	  Of their languages, governments, marriage, literature, products,	  Of their languages, governments, marriage, literature, products,
      games, wars, manners, crimes, prisons, slaves, heroes, poets,	      games, wars, manners, crimes, prisons, slaves, heroes, poets,	      games, wars, manners, crimes, prisons, slaves, heroes, poets,	      games, wars, manners, crimes, prisons, slaves, heroes, poets,
  I suspect their results curiously await in the yet unseen world,	  I suspect their results curiously await in the yet unseen world,	  I suspect their results curiously await in the yet unseen world,	  I suspect their results curiously await in the yet unseen world,
      counterparts of what accrued to them in the seen world,	      counterparts of what accrued to them in the seen world,	      counterparts of what accrued to them in the seen world,	      counterparts of what accrued to them in the seen world,
  I suspect I shall meet them there,	  I suspect I shall meet them there,	  I suspect I shall meet them there,	  I suspect I shall meet them there,
  I suspect I shall there find each old particular of those unnamed lands.	  I suspect I shall there find each old particular of those unnamed lands.	  I suspect I shall there find each old particular of those unnamed lands.	  I suspect I shall there find each old particular of those unnamed lands.
			
			
			
			
Song of Prudence	Song of Prudence	Song of Prudence	Song of Prudence
			
  Manhattan's streets I saunter'd pondering,	  Manhattan's streets I saunter'd pondering,	  Manhattan's streets I saunter'd pondering,	  Manhattan's streets I saunter'd pondering,
  On Time, Space, Reality--on such as these, and abreast with them Prudence.	  On Time, Space, Reality--on such as these, and abreast with them Prudence.	  On Time, Space, Reality--on such as these, and abreast with them Prudence.	  On Time, Space, Reality--on such as these, and abreast with them Prudence.
			
  The last explanation always remains to be made about prudence,	  The last explanation always remains to be made about prudence,	  The last explanation always remains to be made about prudence,	  The last explanation always remains to be made about prudence,
  Little and large alike drop quietly aside from the prudence that	  Little and large alike drop quietly aside from the prudence that	  Little and large alike drop quietly aside from the prudence that	  Little and large alike drop quietly aside from the prudence that
      suits immortality.	      suits immortality.	      suits immortality.	      suits immortality.
			
  The soul is of itself,	  The soul is of itself,	  The soul is of itself,	  The soul is of itself,
  All verges to it, all has reference to what ensues,	  All verges to it, all has reference to what ensues,	  All verges to it, all has reference to what ensues,	  All verges to it, all has reference to what ensues,
  All that a person does, says, thinks, is of consequence,	  All that a person does, says, thinks, is of consequence,	  All that a person does, says, thinks, is of consequence,	  All that a person does, says, thinks, is of consequence,
  Not a move can a man or woman make, that affects him or her in a day,	  Not a move can a man or woman make, that affects him or her in a day,	  Not a move can a man or woman make, that affects him or her in a day,	  Not a move can a man or woman make, that affects him or her in a day,
      month, any part of the direct lifetime, or the hour of death,	      month, any part of the direct lifetime, or the hour of death,	      month, any part of the direct lifetime, or the hour of death,	      month, any part of the direct lifetime, or the hour of death,
  But the same affects him or her onward afterward through the	  But the same affects him or her onward afterward through the	  But the same affects him or her onward afterward through the	  But the same affects him or her onward afterward through the
      indirect lifetime.	      indirect lifetime.	      indirect lifetime.	      indirect lifetime.
			
  The indirect is just as much as the direct,	  The indirect is just as much as the direct,	  The indirect is just as much as the direct,	  The indirect is just as much as the direct,
  The spirit receives from the body just as much as it gives to the	  The spirit receives from the body just as much as it gives to the	  The spirit receives from the body just as much as it gives to the	  The spirit receives from the body just as much as it gives to the
      body, if not more.	      body, if not more.	      body, if not more.	      body, if not more.
			
  Not one word or deed, not venereal sore, discoloration, privacy of	  Not one word or deed, not venereal sore, discoloration, privacy of	  Not one word or deed, not venereal sore, discoloration, privacy of	  Not one word or deed, not venereal sore, discoloration, privacy of
      the onanist,	      the onanist,	      the onanist,	      the onanist,
  Putridity of gluttons or rum-drinkers, peculation, cunning,	  Putridity of gluttons or rum-drinkers, peculation, cunning,	  Putridity of gluttons or rum-drinkers, peculation, cunning,	  Putridity of gluttons or rum-drinkers, peculation, cunning,
      betrayal, murder, seduction, prostitution,	      betrayal, murder, seduction, prostitution,	      betrayal, murder, seduction, prostitution,	      betrayal, murder, seduction, prostitution,
  But has results beyond death as really as before death.	  But has results beyond death as really as before death.	  But has results beyond death as really as before death.	  But has results beyond death as really as before death.
			
  Charity and personal force are the only investments worth any thing.	  Charity and personal force are the only investments worth any thing.	  Charity and personal force are the only investments worth any thing.	  Charity and personal force are the only investments worth any thing.
			
  No specification is necessary, all that a male or female does, that	  No specification is necessary, all that a male or female does, that	  No specification is necessary, all that a male or female does, that	  No specification is necessary, all that a male or female does, that
      is vigorous, benevolent, clean, is so much profit to him or her,	      is vigorous, benevolent, clean, is so much profit to him or her,	      is vigorous, benevolent, clean, is so much profit to him or her,	      is vigorous, benevolent, clean, is so much profit to him or her,
  In the unshakable order of the universe and through the whole scope	  In the unshakable order of the universe and through the whole scope	  In the unshakable order of the universe and through the whole scope	  In the unshakable order of the universe and through the whole scope
      of it forever.	      of it forever.	      of it forever.	      of it forever.
			
  Who has been wise receives interest,	  Who has been wise receives interest,	  Who has been wise receives interest,	  Who has been wise receives interest,
  Savage, felon, President, judge, farmer, sailor, mechanic, literat,	  Savage, felon, President, judge, farmer, sailor, mechanic, literat,	  Savage, felon, President, judge, farmer, sailor, mechanic, literat,	  Savage, felon, President, judge, farmer, sailor, mechanic, literat,
      young, old, it is the same,	      young, old, it is the same,	      young, old, it is the same,	      young, old, it is the same,
  The interest will come round--all will come round.	  The interest will come round--all will come round.	  The interest will come round--all will come round.	  The interest will come round--all will come round.
			
  Singly, wholly, to affect now, affected their time, will forever affect,	  Singly, wholly, to affect now, affected their time, will forever affect,	  Singly, wholly, to affect now, affected their time, will forever affect,	  Singly, wholly, to affect now, affected their time, will forever affect,
      all of the past and all of the present and all of the future,	      all of the past and all of the present and all of the future,	      all of the past and all of the present and all of the future,	      all of the past and all of the present and all of the future,
  All the brave actions of war and peace,	  All the brave actions of war and peace,	  All the brave actions of war and peace,	  All the brave actions of war and peace,
  All help given to relatives, strangers, the poor, old, sorrowful,	  All help given to relatives, strangers, the poor, old, sorrowful,	  All help given to relatives, strangers, the poor, old, sorrowful,	  All help given to relatives, strangers, the poor, old, sorrowful,
      young children, widows, the sick, and to shunn'd persons,	      young children, widows, the sick, and to shunn'd persons,	      young children, widows, the sick, and to shunn'd persons,	      young children, widows, the sick, and to shunn'd persons,
  All self-denial that stood steady and aloof on wrecks, and saw	  All self-denial that stood steady and aloof on wrecks, and saw	  All self-denial that stood steady and aloof on wrecks, and saw	  All self-denial that stood steady and aloof on wrecks, and saw
      others fill the seats of the boats,	      others fill the seats of the boats,	      others fill the seats of the boats,	      others fill the seats of the boats,
  All offering of substance or life for the good old cause, or for a	  All offering of substance or life for the good old cause, or for a	  All offering of substance or life for the good old cause, or for a	  All offering of substance or life for the good old cause, or for a
      friend's sake, or opinion's sake,	      friend's sake, or opinion's sake,	      friend's sake, or opinion's sake,	      friend's sake, or opinion's sake,
  All pains of enthusiasts scoff'd at by their neighbors,	  All pains of enthusiasts scoff'd at by their neighbors,	  All pains of enthusiasts scoff'd at by their neighbors,	  All pains of enthusiasts scoff'd at by their neighbors,
  All the limitless sweet love and precious suffering of mothers,	  All the limitless sweet love and precious suffering of mothers,	  All the limitless sweet love and precious suffering of mothers,	  All the limitless sweet love and precious suffering of mothers,
  All honest men baffled in strifes recorded or unrecorded,	  All honest men baffled in strifes recorded or unrecorded,	  All honest men baffled in strifes recorded or unrecorded,	  All honest men baffled in strifes recorded or unrecorded,
  All the grandeur and good of ancient nations whose fragments we inherit,	  All the grandeur and good of ancient nations whose fragments we inherit,	  All the grandeur and good of ancient nations whose fragments we inherit,	  All the grandeur and good of ancient nations whose fragments we inherit,
  All the good of the dozens of ancient nations unknown to us by name,	  All the good of the dozens of ancient nations unknown to us by name,	  All the good of the dozens of ancient nations unknown to us by name,	  All the good of the dozens of ancient nations unknown to us by name,
      date, location,	      date, location,	      date, location,	      date, location,
  All that was ever manfully begun, whether it succeeded or no,	  All that was ever manfully begun, whether it succeeded or no,	  All that was ever manfully begun, whether it succeeded or no,	  All that was ever manfully begun, whether it succeeded or no,
  All suggestions of the divine mind of man or the divinity of his	  All suggestions of the divine mind of man or the divinity of his	  All suggestions of the divine mind of man or the divinity of his	  All suggestions of the divine mind of man or the divinity of his
      mouth, or the shaping of his great hands,	      mouth, or the shaping of his great hands,	      mouth, or the shaping of his great hands,	      mouth, or the shaping of his great hands,
  All that is well thought or said this day on any part of the globe,	  All that is well thought or said this day on any part of the globe,	  All that is well thought or said this day on any part of the globe,	  All that is well thought or said this day on any part of the globe,
      or on any of the wandering stars, or on any of the fix'd stars,	      or on any of the wandering stars, or on any of the fix'd stars,	      or on any of the wandering stars, or on any of the fix'd stars,	      or on any of the wandering stars, or on any of the fix'd stars,
      by those there as we are here,	      by those there as we are here,	      by those there as we are here,	      by those there as we are here,
  All that is henceforth to be thought or done by you whoever you are,	  All that is henceforth to be thought or done by you whoever you are,	  All that is henceforth to be thought or done by you whoever you are,	  All that is henceforth to be thought or done by you whoever you are,
      or by any one,	      or by any one,	      or by any one,	      or by any one,
  These inure, have inured, shall inure, to the identities from which	  These inure, have inured, shall inure, to the identities from which	  These inure, have inured, shall inure, to the identities from which	  These inure, have inured, shall inure, to the identities from which
      they sprang, or shall spring.	      they sprang, or shall spring.	      they sprang, or shall spring.	      they sprang, or shall spring.
			
  Did you guess any thing lived only its moment?	  Did you guess any thing lived only its moment?	  Did you guess any thing lived only its moment?	  Did you guess any thing lived only its moment?
  The world does not so exist, no parts palpable or impalpable so exist,	  The world does not so exist, no parts palpable or impalpable so exist,	  The world does not so exist, no parts palpable or impalpable so exist,	  The world does not so exist, no parts palpable or impalpable so exist,
  No consummation exists without being from some long previous	  No consummation exists without being from some long previous	  No consummation exists without being from some long previous	  No consummation exists without being from some long previous
      consummation, and that from some other,	      consummation, and that from some other,	      consummation, and that from some other,	      consummation, and that from some other,
  Without the farthest conceivable one coming a bit nearer the	  Without the farthest conceivable one coming a bit nearer the	  Without the farthest conceivable one coming a bit nearer the	  Without the farthest conceivable one coming a bit nearer the
      beginning than any.	      beginning than any.	      beginning than any.	      beginning than any.
			
  Whatever satisfies souls is true;	  Whatever satisfies souls is true;	  Whatever satisfies souls is true;	  Whatever satisfies souls is true;
  Prudence entirely satisfies the craving and glut of souls,	  Prudence entirely satisfies the craving and glut of souls,	  Prudence entirely satisfies the craving and glut of souls,	  Prudence entirely satisfies the craving and glut of souls,
  Itself only finally satisfies the soul,	  Itself only finally satisfies the soul,	  Itself only finally satisfies the soul,	  Itself only finally satisfies the soul,
  The soul has that measureless pride which revolts from every lesson	  The soul has that measureless pride which revolts from every lesson	  The soul has that measureless pride which revolts from every lesson	  The soul has that measureless pride which revolts from every lesson
      but its own.	      but its own.	      but its own.	      but its own.
			
  Now I breathe the word of the prudence that walks abreast with time,	  Now I breathe the word of the prudence that walks abreast with time,	  Now I breathe the word of the prudence that walks abreast with time,	  Now I breathe the word of the prudence that walks abreast with time,
      space, reality,	      space, reality,	      space, reality,	      space, reality,
  That answers the pride which refuses every lesson but its own.	  That answers the pride which refuses every lesson but its own.	  That answers the pride which refuses every lesson but its own.	  That answers the pride which refuses every lesson but its own.
			
  What is prudence is indivisible,	  What is prudence is indivisible,	  What is prudence is indivisible,	  What is prudence is indivisible,
  Declines to separate one part of life from every part,	  Declines to separate one part of life from every part,	  Declines to separate one part of life from every part,	  Declines to separate one part of life from every part,
  Divides not the righteous from the unrighteous or the living from the dead,	  Divides not the righteous from the unrighteous or the living from the dead,	  Divides not the righteous from the unrighteous or the living from the dead,	  Divides not the righteous from the unrighteous or the living from the dead,
  Matches every thought or act by its correlative,	  Matches every thought or act by its correlative,	  Matches every thought or act by its correlative,	  Matches every thought or act by its correlative,
  Knows no possible forgiveness or deputed atonement,	  Knows no possible forgiveness or deputed atonement,	  Knows no possible forgiveness or deputed atonement,	  Knows no possible forgiveness or deputed atonement,
  Knows that the young man who composedly peril'd his life and lost it	  Knows that the young man who composedly peril'd his life and lost it	  Knows that the young man who composedly peril'd his life and lost it	  Knows that the young man who composedly peril'd his life and lost it
      has done exceedingly well for himself without doubt,	      has done exceedingly well for himself without doubt,	      has done exceedingly well for himself without doubt,	      has done exceedingly well for himself without doubt,
  That he who never peril'd his life, but retains it to old age in	  That he who never peril'd his life, but retains it to old age in	  That he who never peril'd his life, but retains it to old age in	  That he who never peril'd his life, but retains it to old age in
      riches and ease, has probably achiev'd nothing for himself worth	      riches and ease, has probably achiev'd nothing for himself worth	      riches and ease, has probably achiev'd nothing for himself worth	      riches and ease, has probably achiev'd nothing for himself worth
      mentioning,	      mentioning,	      mentioning,	      mentioning,
  Knows that only that person has really learn'd who has learn'd to	  Knows that only that person has really learn'd who has learn'd to	  Knows that only that person has really learn'd who has learn'd to	  Knows that only that person has really learn'd who has learn'd to
      prefer results,	      prefer results,	      prefer results,	      prefer results,
  Who favors body and soul the same,	  Who favors body and soul the same,	  Who favors body and soul the same,	  Who favors body and soul the same,
  Who perceives the indirect assuredly following the direct,	  Who perceives the indirect assuredly following the direct,	  Who perceives the indirect assuredly following the direct,	  Who perceives the indirect assuredly following the direct,
  Who in his spirit in any emergency whatever neither hurries nor	  Who in his spirit in any emergency whatever neither hurries nor	  Who in his spirit in any emergency whatever neither hurries nor	  Who in his spirit in any emergency whatever neither hurries nor
      avoids death.	      avoids death.	      avoids death.	      avoids death.
			
			
			
			
The Singer in the Prison	The Singer in the Prison	The Singer in the Prison	The Singer in the Prison
			
          O sight of pity, shame and dole!	          O sight of pity, shame and dole!	          O sight of pity, shame and dole!	          O sight of pity, shame and dole!
          O fearful thought--a convict soul.	          O fearful thought--a convict soul.	          O fearful thought--a convict soul.	          O fearful thought--a convict soul.
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Rang the refrain along the hall, the prison,	  Rang the refrain along the hall, the prison,	  Rang the refrain along the hall, the prison,	  Rang the refrain along the hall, the prison,
  Rose to the roof, the vaults of heaven above,	  Rose to the roof, the vaults of heaven above,	  Rose to the roof, the vaults of heaven above,	  Rose to the roof, the vaults of heaven above,
  Pouring in floods of melody in tones so pensive sweet and strong the	  Pouring in floods of melody in tones so pensive sweet and strong the	  Pouring in floods of melody in tones so pensive sweet and strong the	  Pouring in floods of melody in tones so pensive sweet and strong the
      like whereof was never heard,	      like whereof was never heard,	      like whereof was never heard,	      like whereof was never heard,
  Reaching the far-off sentry and the armed guards, who ceas'd their pacing,	  Reaching the far-off sentry and the armed guards, who ceas'd their pacing,	  Reaching the far-off sentry and the armed guards, who ceas'd their pacing,	  Reaching the far-off sentry and the armed guards, who ceas'd their pacing,
  Making the hearer's pulses stop for ecstasy and awe.	  Making the hearer's pulses stop for ecstasy and awe.	  Making the hearer's pulses stop for ecstasy and awe.	  Making the hearer's pulses stop for ecstasy and awe.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  The sun was low in the west one winter day,	  The sun was low in the west one winter day,	  The sun was low in the west one winter day,	  The sun was low in the west one winter day,
  When down a narrow aisle amid the thieves and outlaws of the land,	  When down a narrow aisle amid the thieves and outlaws of the land,	  When down a narrow aisle amid the thieves and outlaws of the land,	  When down a narrow aisle amid the thieves and outlaws of the land,
  (There by the hundreds seated, sear-faced murderers, wily counterfeiters,	  (There by the hundreds seated, sear-faced murderers, wily counterfeiters,	  (There by the hundreds seated, sear-faced murderers, wily counterfeiters,	  (There by the hundreds seated, sear-faced murderers, wily counterfeiters,
  Gather'd to Sunday church in prison walls, the keepers round,	  Gather'd to Sunday church in prison walls, the keepers round,	  Gather'd to Sunday church in prison walls, the keepers round,	  Gather'd to Sunday church in prison walls, the keepers round,
  Plenteous, well-armed, watching with vigilant eyes,)	  Plenteous, well-armed, watching with vigilant eyes,)	  Plenteous, well-armed, watching with vigilant eyes,)	  Plenteous, well-armed, watching with vigilant eyes,)
  Calmly a lady walk'd holding a little innocent child by either hand,	  Calmly a lady walk'd holding a little innocent child by either hand,	  Calmly a lady walk'd holding a little innocent child by either hand,	  Calmly a lady walk'd holding a little innocent child by either hand,
  Whom seating on their stools beside her on the platform,	  Whom seating on their stools beside her on the platform,	  Whom seating on their stools beside her on the platform,	  Whom seating on their stools beside her on the platform,
  She, first preluding with the instrument a low and musical prelude,	  She, first preluding with the instrument a low and musical prelude,	  She, first preluding with the instrument a low and musical prelude,	  She, first preluding with the instrument a low and musical prelude,
  In voice surpassing all, sang forth a quaint old hymn.	  In voice surpassing all, sang forth a quaint old hymn.	  In voice surpassing all, sang forth a quaint old hymn.	  In voice surpassing all, sang forth a quaint old hymn.
			
       A soul confined by bars and bands,	       A soul confined by bars and bands,	       A soul confined by bars and bands,	       A soul confined by bars and bands,
       Cries, help! O help! and wrings her hands,	       Cries, help! O help! and wrings her hands,	       Cries, help! O help! and wrings her hands,	       Cries, help! O help! and wrings her hands,
       Blinded her eyes, bleeding her breast,	       Blinded her eyes, bleeding her breast,	       Blinded her eyes, bleeding her breast,	       Blinded her eyes, bleeding her breast,
       Nor pardon finds, nor balm of rest.	       Nor pardon finds, nor balm of rest.	       Nor pardon finds, nor balm of rest.	       Nor pardon finds, nor balm of rest.
			
       Ceaseless she paces to and fro,	       Ceaseless she paces to and fro,	       Ceaseless she paces to and fro,	       Ceaseless she paces to and fro,
       O heart-sick days! O nights of woe!	       O heart-sick days! O nights of woe!	       O heart-sick days! O nights of woe!	       O heart-sick days! O nights of woe!
       Nor hand of friend, nor loving face,	       Nor hand of friend, nor loving face,	       Nor hand of friend, nor loving face,	       Nor hand of friend, nor loving face,
       Nor favor comes, nor word of grace.	       Nor favor comes, nor word of grace.	       Nor favor comes, nor word of grace.	       Nor favor comes, nor word of grace.
			
       It was not I that sinn'd the sin,	       It was not I that sinn'd the sin,	       It was not I that sinn'd the sin,	       It was not I that sinn'd the sin,
       The ruthless body dragg'd me in;	       The ruthless body dragg'd me in;	       The ruthless body dragg'd me in;	       The ruthless body dragg'd me in;
       Though long I strove courageously,	       Though long I strove courageously,	       Though long I strove courageously,	       Though long I strove courageously,
       The body was too much for me.	       The body was too much for me.	       The body was too much for me.	       The body was too much for me.
			
       Dear prison'd soul bear up a space,	       Dear prison'd soul bear up a space,	       Dear prison'd soul bear up a space,	       Dear prison'd soul bear up a space,
       For soon or late the certain grace;	       For soon or late the certain grace;	       For soon or late the certain grace;	       For soon or late the certain grace;
       To set thee free and bear thee home,	       To set thee free and bear thee home,	       To set thee free and bear thee home,	       To set thee free and bear thee home,
       The heavenly pardoner death shall come.	       The heavenly pardoner death shall come.	       The heavenly pardoner death shall come.	       The heavenly pardoner death shall come.
			
          Convict no more, nor shame, nor dole!	          Convict no more, nor shame, nor dole!	          Convict no more, nor shame, nor dole!	          Convict no more, nor shame, nor dole!
          Depart--a God-enfranchis'd soul!	          Depart--a God-enfranchis'd soul!	          Depart--a God-enfranchis'd soul!	          Depart--a God-enfranchis'd soul!
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  The singer ceas'd,	  The singer ceas'd,	  The singer ceas'd,	  The singer ceas'd,
  One glance swept from her clear calm eyes o'er all those upturn'd faces,	  One glance swept from her clear calm eyes o'er all those upturn'd faces,	  One glance swept from her clear calm eyes o'er all those upturn'd faces,	  One glance swept from her clear calm eyes o'er all those upturn'd faces,
  Strange sea of prison faces, a thousand varied, crafty, brutal,	  Strange sea of prison faces, a thousand varied, crafty, brutal,	  Strange sea of prison faces, a thousand varied, crafty, brutal,	  Strange sea of prison faces, a thousand varied, crafty, brutal,
      seam'd and beauteous faces,	      seam'd and beauteous faces,	      seam'd and beauteous faces,	      seam'd and beauteous faces,
  Then rising, passing back along the narrow aisle between them,	  Then rising, passing back along the narrow aisle between them,	  Then rising, passing back along the narrow aisle between them,	  Then rising, passing back along the narrow aisle between them,
  While her gown touch'd them rustling in the silence,	  While her gown touch'd them rustling in the silence,	  While her gown touch'd them rustling in the silence,	  While her gown touch'd them rustling in the silence,
  She vanish'd with her children in the dusk.	  She vanish'd with her children in the dusk.	  She vanish'd with her children in the dusk.	  She vanish'd with her children in the dusk.
			
  While upon all, convicts and armed keepers ere they stirr'd,	  While upon all, convicts and armed keepers ere they stirr'd,	  While upon all, convicts and armed keepers ere they stirr'd,	  While upon all, convicts and armed keepers ere they stirr'd,
  (Convict forgetting prison, keeper his loaded pistol,)	  (Convict forgetting prison, keeper his loaded pistol,)	  (Convict forgetting prison, keeper his loaded pistol,)	  (Convict forgetting prison, keeper his loaded pistol,)
  A hush and pause fell down a wondrous minute,	  A hush and pause fell down a wondrous minute,	  A hush and pause fell down a wondrous minute,	  A hush and pause fell down a wondrous minute,
  With deep half-stifled sobs and sound of bad men bow'd and moved to weeping,	  With deep half-stifled sobs and sound of bad men bow'd and moved to weeping,	  With deep half-stifled sobs and sound of bad men bow'd and moved to weeping,	  With deep half-stifled sobs and sound of bad men bow'd and moved to weeping,
  And youth's convulsive breathings, memories of home,	  And youth's convulsive breathings, memories of home,	  And youth's convulsive breathings, memories of home,	  And youth's convulsive breathings, memories of home,
  The mother's voice in lullaby, the sister's care, the happy childhood,	  The mother's voice in lullaby, the sister's care, the happy childhood,	  The mother's voice in lullaby, the sister's care, the happy childhood,	  The mother's voice in lullaby, the sister's care, the happy childhood,
  The long-pent spirit rous'd to reminiscence;	  The long-pent spirit rous'd to reminiscence;	  The long-pent spirit rous'd to reminiscence;	  The long-pent spirit rous'd to reminiscence;
  A wondrous minute then--but after in the solitary night, to many,	  A wondrous minute then--but after in the solitary night, to many,	  A wondrous minute then--but after in the solitary night, to many,	  A wondrous minute then--but after in the solitary night, to many,
      many there,	      many there,	      many there,	      many there,
  Years after, even in the hour of death, the sad refrain, the tune,	  Years after, even in the hour of death, the sad refrain, the tune,	  Years after, even in the hour of death, the sad refrain, the tune,	  Years after, even in the hour of death, the sad refrain, the tune,
      the voice, the words,	      the voice, the words,	      the voice, the words,	      the voice, the words,
  Resumed, the large calm lady walks the narrow aisle,	  Resumed, the large calm lady walks the narrow aisle,	  Resumed, the large calm lady walks the narrow aisle,	  Resumed, the large calm lady walks the narrow aisle,
  The wailing melody again, the singer in the prison sings,	  The wailing melody again, the singer in the prison sings,	  The wailing melody again, the singer in the prison sings,	  The wailing melody again, the singer in the prison sings,
			
       O sight of pity, shame and dole!	       O sight of pity, shame and dole!	       O sight of pity, shame and dole!	       O sight of pity, shame and dole!
       O fearful thought--a convict soul.	       O fearful thought--a convict soul.	       O fearful thought--a convict soul.	       O fearful thought--a convict soul.
			
			
			
			
Warble for Lilac-Time	Warble for Lilac-Time	Warble for Lilac-Time	Warble for Lilac-Time
			
  Warble me now for joy of lilac-time, (returning in reminiscence,)	  Warble me now for joy of lilac-time, (returning in reminiscence,)	  Warble me now for joy of lilac-time, (returning in reminiscence,)	  Warble me now for joy of lilac-time, (returning in reminiscence,)
  Sort me O tongue and lips for Nature's sake, souvenirs of earliest summer,	  Sort me O tongue and lips for Nature's sake, souvenirs of earliest summer,	  Sort me O tongue and lips for Nature's sake, souvenirs of earliest summer,	  Sort me O tongue and lips for Nature's sake, souvenirs of earliest summer,
  Gather the welcome signs, (as children with pebbles or stringing shells,)	  Gather the welcome signs, (as children with pebbles or stringing shells,)	  Gather the welcome signs, (as children with pebbles or stringing shells,)	  Gather the welcome signs, (as children with pebbles or stringing shells,)
  Put in April and May, the hylas croaking in the ponds, the elastic air,	  Put in April and May, the hylas croaking in the ponds, the elastic air,	  Put in April and May, the hylas croaking in the ponds, the elastic air,	  Put in April and May, the hylas croaking in the ponds, the elastic air,
  Bees, butterflies, the sparrow with its simple notes,	  Bees, butterflies, the sparrow with its simple notes,	  Bees, butterflies, the sparrow with its simple notes,	  Bees, butterflies, the sparrow with its simple notes,
  Blue-bird and darting swallow, nor forget the high-hole flashing his	  Blue-bird and darting swallow, nor forget the high-hole flashing his	  Blue-bird and darting swallow, nor forget the high-hole flashing his	  Blue-bird and darting swallow, nor forget the high-hole flashing his
      golden wings,	      golden wings,	      golden wings,	      golden wings,
  The tranquil sunny haze, the clinging smoke, the vapor,	  The tranquil sunny haze, the clinging smoke, the vapor,	  The tranquil sunny haze, the clinging smoke, the vapor,	  The tranquil sunny haze, the clinging smoke, the vapor,
  Shimmer of waters with fish in them, the cerulean above,	  Shimmer of waters with fish in them, the cerulean above,	  Shimmer of waters with fish in them, the cerulean above,	  Shimmer of waters with fish in them, the cerulean above,
  All that is jocund and sparkling, the brooks running,	  All that is jocund and sparkling, the brooks running,	  All that is jocund and sparkling, the brooks running,	  All that is jocund and sparkling, the brooks running,
  The maple woods, the crisp February days and the sugar-making,	  The maple woods, the crisp February days and the sugar-making,	  The maple woods, the crisp February days and the sugar-making,	  The maple woods, the crisp February days and the sugar-making,
  The robin where he hops, bright-eyed, brown-breasted,	  The robin where he hops, bright-eyed, brown-breasted,	  The robin where he hops, bright-eyed, brown-breasted,	  The robin where he hops, bright-eyed, brown-breasted,
  With musical clear call at sunrise, and again at sunset,	  With musical clear call at sunrise, and again at sunset,	  With musical clear call at sunrise, and again at sunset,	  With musical clear call at sunrise, and again at sunset,
  Or flitting among the trees of the apple-orchard, building the nest	  Or flitting among the trees of the apple-orchard, building the nest	  Or flitting among the trees of the apple-orchard, building the nest	  Or flitting among the trees of the apple-orchard, building the nest
      of his mate,	      of his mate,	      of his mate,	      of his mate,
  The melted snow of March, the willow sending forth its yellow-green sprouts,	  The melted snow of March, the willow sending forth its yellow-green sprouts,	  The melted snow of March, the willow sending forth its yellow-green sprouts,	  The melted snow of March, the willow sending forth its yellow-green sprouts,
  For spring-time is here! the summer is here! and what is this in it	  For spring-time is here! the summer is here! and what is this in it	  For spring-time is here! the summer is here! and what is this in it	  For spring-time is here! the summer is here! and what is this in it
      and from it?	      and from it?	      and from it?	      and from it?
  Thou, soul, unloosen'd--the restlessness after I know not what;	  Thou, soul, unloosen'd--the restlessness after I know not what;	  Thou, soul, unloosen'd--the restlessness after I know not what;	  Thou, soul, unloosen'd--the restlessness after I know not what;
  Come, let us lag here no longer, let us be up and away!	  Come, let us lag here no longer, let us be up and away!	  Come, let us lag here no longer, let us be up and away!	  Come, let us lag here no longer, let us be up and away!
  O if one could but fly like a bird!	  O if one could but fly like a bird!	  O if one could but fly like a bird!	  O if one could but fly like a bird!
  O to escape, to sail forth as in a ship!	  O to escape, to sail forth as in a ship!	  O to escape, to sail forth as in a ship!	  O to escape, to sail forth as in a ship!
  To glide with thee O soul, o'er all, in all, as a ship o'er the waters;	  To glide with thee O soul, o'er all, in all, as a ship o'er the waters;	  To glide with thee O soul, o'er all, in all, as a ship o'er the waters;	  To glide with thee O soul, o'er all, in all, as a ship o'er the waters;
  Gathering these hints, the preludes, the blue sky, the grass, the	  Gathering these hints, the preludes, the blue sky, the grass, the	  Gathering these hints, the preludes, the blue sky, the grass, the	  Gathering these hints, the preludes, the blue sky, the grass, the
      morning drops of dew,	      morning drops of dew,	      morning drops of dew,	      morning drops of dew,
  The lilac-scent, the bushes with dark green heart-shaped leaves,	  The lilac-scent, the bushes with dark green heart-shaped leaves,	  The lilac-scent, the bushes with dark green heart-shaped leaves,	  The lilac-scent, the bushes with dark green heart-shaped leaves,
  Wood-violets, the little delicate pale blossoms called innocence,	  Wood-violets, the little delicate pale blossoms called innocence,	  Wood-violets, the little delicate pale blossoms called innocence,	  Wood-violets, the little delicate pale blossoms called innocence,
  Samples and sorts not for themselves alone, but for their atmosphere,	  Samples and sorts not for themselves alone, but for their atmosphere,	  Samples and sorts not for themselves alone, but for their atmosphere,	  Samples and sorts not for themselves alone, but for their atmosphere,
  To grace the bush I love--to sing with the birds,	  To grace the bush I love--to sing with the birds,	  To grace the bush I love--to sing with the birds,	  To grace the bush I love--to sing with the birds,
  A warble for joy of returning in reminiscence.	  A warble for joy of returning in reminiscence.	  A warble for joy of returning in reminiscence.	  A warble for joy of returning in reminiscence.
			
			
			
			
Outlines for a Tomb [G. P., Buried 1870]	Outlines for a Tomb [G. P., Buried 1870]	Outlines for a Tomb [G. P., Buried 1870]	Outlines for a Tomb [G. P., Buried 1870]
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  What may we chant, O thou within this tomb?	  What may we chant, O thou within this tomb?	  What may we chant, O thou within this tomb?	  What may we chant, O thou within this tomb?
  What tablets, outlines, hang for thee, O millionnaire?	  What tablets, outlines, hang for thee, O millionnaire?	  What tablets, outlines, hang for thee, O millionnaire?	  What tablets, outlines, hang for thee, O millionnaire?
  The life thou lived'st we know not,	  The life thou lived'st we know not,	  The life thou lived'st we know not,	  The life thou lived'st we know not,
  But that thou walk'dst thy years in barter, 'mid the haunts of	  But that thou walk'dst thy years in barter, 'mid the haunts of	  But that thou walk'dst thy years in barter, 'mid the haunts of	  But that thou walk'dst thy years in barter, 'mid the haunts of
      brokers,	      brokers,	      brokers,	      brokers,
  Nor heroism thine, nor war, nor glory.	  Nor heroism thine, nor war, nor glory.	  Nor heroism thine, nor war, nor glory.	  Nor heroism thine, nor war, nor glory.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Silent, my soul,	  Silent, my soul,	  Silent, my soul,	  Silent, my soul,
  With drooping lids, as waiting, ponder'd,	  With drooping lids, as waiting, ponder'd,	  With drooping lids, as waiting, ponder'd,	  With drooping lids, as waiting, ponder'd,
  Turning from all the samples, monuments of heroes.	  Turning from all the samples, monuments of heroes.	  Turning from all the samples, monuments of heroes.	  Turning from all the samples, monuments of heroes.
			
  While through the interior vistas,	  While through the interior vistas,	  While through the interior vistas,	  While through the interior vistas,
  Noiseless uprose, phantasmic, (as by night Auroras of the north,)	  Noiseless uprose, phantasmic, (as by night Auroras of the north,)	  Noiseless uprose, phantasmic, (as by night Auroras of the north,)	  Noiseless uprose, phantasmic, (as by night Auroras of the north,)
  Lambent tableaus, prophetic, bodiless scenes,	  Lambent tableaus, prophetic, bodiless scenes,	  Lambent tableaus, prophetic, bodiless scenes,	  Lambent tableaus, prophetic, bodiless scenes,
  Spiritual projections.	  Spiritual projections.	  Spiritual projections.	  Spiritual projections.
			
  In one, among the city streets a laborer's home appear'd,	  In one, among the city streets a laborer's home appear'd,	  In one, among the city streets a laborer's home appear'd,	  In one, among the city streets a laborer's home appear'd,
  After his day's work done, cleanly, sweet-air'd, the gaslight burning,	  After his day's work done, cleanly, sweet-air'd, the gaslight burning,	  After his day's work done, cleanly, sweet-air'd, the gaslight burning,	  After his day's work done, cleanly, sweet-air'd, the gaslight burning,
  The carpet swept and a fire in the cheerful stove.	  The carpet swept and a fire in the cheerful stove.	  The carpet swept and a fire in the cheerful stove.	  The carpet swept and a fire in the cheerful stove.
			
  In one, the sacred parturition scene,	  In one, the sacred parturition scene,	  In one, the sacred parturition scene,	  In one, the sacred parturition scene,
  A happy painless mother birth'd a perfect child.	  A happy painless mother birth'd a perfect child.	  A happy painless mother birth'd a perfect child.	  A happy painless mother birth'd a perfect child.
			
  In one, at a bounteous morning meal,	  In one, at a bounteous morning meal,	  In one, at a bounteous morning meal,	  In one, at a bounteous morning meal,
  Sat peaceful parents with contented sons.	  Sat peaceful parents with contented sons.	  Sat peaceful parents with contented sons.	  Sat peaceful parents with contented sons.
			
  In one, by twos and threes, young people,	  In one, by twos and threes, young people,	  In one, by twos and threes, young people,	  In one, by twos and threes, young people,
  Hundreds concentring, walk'd the paths and streets and roads,	  Hundreds concentring, walk'd the paths and streets and roads,	  Hundreds concentring, walk'd the paths and streets and roads,	  Hundreds concentring, walk'd the paths and streets and roads,
  Toward a tall-domed school.	  Toward a tall-domed school.	  Toward a tall-domed school.	  Toward a tall-domed school.
			
  In one a trio beautiful,	  In one a trio beautiful,	  In one a trio beautiful,	  In one a trio beautiful,
  Grandmother, loving daughter, loving daughter's daughter, sat,	  Grandmother, loving daughter, loving daughter's daughter, sat,	  Grandmother, loving daughter, loving daughter's daughter, sat,	  Grandmother, loving daughter, loving daughter's daughter, sat,
  Chatting and sewing.	  Chatting and sewing.	  Chatting and sewing.	  Chatting and sewing.
			
  In one, along a suite of noble rooms,	  In one, along a suite of noble rooms,	  In one, along a suite of noble rooms,	  In one, along a suite of noble rooms,
  'Mid plenteous books and journals, paintings on the walls, fine statuettes,	  'Mid plenteous books and journals, paintings on the walls, fine statuettes,	  'Mid plenteous books and journals, paintings on the walls, fine statuettes,	  'Mid plenteous books and journals, paintings on the walls, fine statuettes,
  Were groups of friendly journeymen, mechanics young and old,	  Were groups of friendly journeymen, mechanics young and old,	  Were groups of friendly journeymen, mechanics young and old,	  Were groups of friendly journeymen, mechanics young and old,
  Reading, conversing.	  Reading, conversing.	  Reading, conversing.	  Reading, conversing.
			
  All, all the shows of laboring life,	  All, all the shows of laboring life,	  All, all the shows of laboring life,	  All, all the shows of laboring life,
  City and country, women's, men's and children's,	  City and country, women's, men's and children's,	  City and country, women's, men's and children's,	  City and country, women's, men's and children's,
  Their wants provided for, hued in the sun and tinged for once with joy,	  Their wants provided for, hued in the sun and tinged for once with joy,	  Their wants provided for, hued in the sun and tinged for once with joy,	  Their wants provided for, hued in the sun and tinged for once with joy,
  Marriage, the street, the factory, farm, the house-room, lodging-room,	  Marriage, the street, the factory, farm, the house-room, lodging-room,	  Marriage, the street, the factory, farm, the house-room, lodging-room,	  Marriage, the street, the factory, farm, the house-room, lodging-room,
  Labor and toll, the bath, gymnasium, playground, library, college,	  Labor and toll, the bath, gymnasium, playground, library, college,	  Labor and toll, the bath, gymnasium, playground, library, college,	  Labor and toll, the bath, gymnasium, playground, library, college,
  The student, boy or girl, led forward to be taught,	  The student, boy or girl, led forward to be taught,	  The student, boy or girl, led forward to be taught,	  The student, boy or girl, led forward to be taught,
  The sick cared for, the shoeless shod, the orphan father'd and mother'd,	  The sick cared for, the shoeless shod, the orphan father'd and mother'd,	  The sick cared for, the shoeless shod, the orphan father'd and mother'd,	  The sick cared for, the shoeless shod, the orphan father'd and mother'd,
  The hungry fed, the houseless housed;	  The hungry fed, the houseless housed;	  The hungry fed, the houseless housed;	  The hungry fed, the houseless housed;
  (The intentions perfect and divine,	  (The intentions perfect and divine,	  (The intentions perfect and divine,	  (The intentions perfect and divine,
  The workings, details, haply human.)	  The workings, details, haply human.)	  The workings, details, haply human.)	  The workings, details, haply human.)
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  O thou within this tomb,	  O thou within this tomb,	  O thou within this tomb,	  O thou within this tomb,
  From thee such scenes, thou stintless, lavish giver,	  From thee such scenes, thou stintless, lavish giver,	  From thee such scenes, thou stintless, lavish giver,	  From thee such scenes, thou stintless, lavish giver,
  Tallying the gifts of earth, large as the earth,	  Tallying the gifts of earth, large as the earth,	  Tallying the gifts of earth, large as the earth,	  Tallying the gifts of earth, large as the earth,
  Thy name an earth, with mountains, fields and tides.	  Thy name an earth, with mountains, fields and tides.	  Thy name an earth, with mountains, fields and tides.	  Thy name an earth, with mountains, fields and tides.
			
  Nor by your streams alone, you rivers,	  Nor by your streams alone, you rivers,	  Nor by your streams alone, you rivers,	  Nor by your streams alone, you rivers,
  By you, your banks Connecticut,	  By you, your banks Connecticut,	  By you, your banks Connecticut,	  By you, your banks Connecticut,
  By you and all your teeming life old Thames,	  By you and all your teeming life old Thames,	  By you and all your teeming life old Thames,	  By you and all your teeming life old Thames,
  By you Potomac laving the ground Washington trod, by you Patapsco,	  By you Potomac laving the ground Washington trod, by you Patapsco,	  By you Potomac laving the ground Washington trod, by you Patapsco,	  By you Potomac laving the ground Washington trod, by you Patapsco,
  You Hudson, you endless Mississippi--nor you alone,	  You Hudson, you endless Mississippi--nor you alone,	  You Hudson, you endless Mississippi--nor you alone,	  You Hudson, you endless Mississippi--nor you alone,
  But to the high seas launch, my thought, his memory.	  But to the high seas launch, my thought, his memory.	  But to the high seas launch, my thought, his memory.	  But to the high seas launch, my thought, his memory.
			
			
			
			
Out from Behind This Mask [To Confront a Portrait]	Out from Behind This Mask [To Confront a Portrait]	Out from Behind This Mask [To Confront a Portrait]	Out from Behind This Mask [To Confront a Portrait]
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Out from behind this bending rough-cut mask,	  Out from behind this bending rough-cut mask,	  Out from behind this bending rough-cut mask,	  Out from behind this bending rough-cut mask,
  These lights and shades, this drama of the whole,	  These lights and shades, this drama of the whole,	  These lights and shades, this drama of the whole,	  These lights and shades, this drama of the whole,
  This common curtain of the face contain'd in me for me, in you for	  This common curtain of the face contain'd in me for me, in you for	  This common curtain of the face contain'd in me for me, in you for	  This common curtain of the face contain'd in me for me, in you for
      you, in each for each,	      you, in each for each,	      you, in each for each,	      you, in each for each,
  (Tragedies, sorrows, laughter, tears--0 heaven!	  (Tragedies, sorrows, laughter, tears--0 heaven!	  (Tragedies, sorrows, laughter, tears--0 heaven!	  (Tragedies, sorrows, laughter, tears--0 heaven!
  The passionate teeming plays this curtain hid!)	  The passionate teeming plays this curtain hid!)	  The passionate teeming plays this curtain hid!)	  The passionate teeming plays this curtain hid!)
  This glaze of God's serenest purest sky,	  This glaze of God's serenest purest sky,	  This glaze of God's serenest purest sky,	  This glaze of God's serenest purest sky,
  This film of Satan's seething pit,	  This film of Satan's seething pit,	  This film of Satan's seething pit,	  This film of Satan's seething pit,
  This heart's geography's map, this limitless small continent, this	  This heart's geography's map, this limitless small continent, this	  This heart's geography's map, this limitless small continent, this	  This heart's geography's map, this limitless small continent, this
      soundless sea;	      soundless sea;	      soundless sea;	      soundless sea;
  Out from the convolutions of this globe,	  Out from the convolutions of this globe,	  Out from the convolutions of this globe,	  Out from the convolutions of this globe,
  This subtler astronomic orb than sun or moon, than Jupiter, Venus, Mars,	  This subtler astronomic orb than sun or moon, than Jupiter, Venus, Mars,	  This subtler astronomic orb than sun or moon, than Jupiter, Venus, Mars,	  This subtler astronomic orb than sun or moon, than Jupiter, Venus, Mars,
  This condensation of the universe, (nay here the only universe,	  This condensation of the universe, (nay here the only universe,	  This condensation of the universe, (nay here the only universe,	  This condensation of the universe, (nay here the only universe,
  Here the idea, all in this mystic handful wrapt;)	  Here the idea, all in this mystic handful wrapt;)	  Here the idea, all in this mystic handful wrapt;)	  Here the idea, all in this mystic handful wrapt;)
  These burin'd eyes, flashing to you to pass to future time,	  These burin'd eyes, flashing to you to pass to future time,	  These burin'd eyes, flashing to you to pass to future time,	  These burin'd eyes, flashing to you to pass to future time,
  To launch and spin through space revolving sideling, from these to emanate,	  To launch and spin through space revolving sideling, from these to emanate,	  To launch and spin through space revolving sideling, from these to emanate,	  To launch and spin through space revolving sideling, from these to emanate,
  To you whoe'er you are--a look.	  To you whoe'er you are--a look.	  To you whoe'er you are--a look.	  To you whoe'er you are--a look.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  A traveler of thoughts and years, of peace and war,	  A traveler of thoughts and years, of peace and war,	  A traveler of thoughts and years, of peace and war,	  A traveler of thoughts and years, of peace and war,
  Of youth long sped and middle age declining,	  Of youth long sped and middle age declining,	  Of youth long sped and middle age declining,	  Of youth long sped and middle age declining,
  (As the first volume of a tale perused and laid away, and this the second,	  (As the first volume of a tale perused and laid away, and this the second,	  (As the first volume of a tale perused and laid away, and this the second,	  (As the first volume of a tale perused and laid away, and this the second,
  Songs, ventures, speculations, presently to close,)	  Songs, ventures, speculations, presently to close,)	  Songs, ventures, speculations, presently to close,)	  Songs, ventures, speculations, presently to close,)
  Lingering a moment here and now, to you I opposite turn,	  Lingering a moment here and now, to you I opposite turn,	  Lingering a moment here and now, to you I opposite turn,	  Lingering a moment here and now, to you I opposite turn,
  As on the road or at some crevice door by chance, or open'd window,	  As on the road or at some crevice door by chance, or open'd window,	  As on the road or at some crevice door by chance, or open'd window,	  As on the road or at some crevice door by chance, or open'd window,
  Pausing, inclining, baring my head, you specially I greet,	  Pausing, inclining, baring my head, you specially I greet,	  Pausing, inclining, baring my head, you specially I greet,	  Pausing, inclining, baring my head, you specially I greet,
  To draw and clinch your soul for once inseparably with mine,	  To draw and clinch your soul for once inseparably with mine,	  To draw and clinch your soul for once inseparably with mine,	  To draw and clinch your soul for once inseparably with mine,
  Then travel travel on.	  Then travel travel on.	  Then travel travel on.	  Then travel travel on.
			
			
			
			
Vocalism	Vocalism	Vocalism	Vocalism
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Vocalism, measure, concentration, determination, and the divine	  Vocalism, measure, concentration, determination, and the divine	  Vocalism, measure, concentration, determination, and the divine	  Vocalism, measure, concentration, determination, and the divine
      power to speak words;	      power to speak words;	      power to speak words;	      power to speak words;
  Are you full-lung'd and limber-lipp'd from long trial? from vigorous	  Are you full-lung'd and limber-lipp'd from long trial? from vigorous	  Are you full-lung'd and limber-lipp'd from long trial? from vigorous	  Are you full-lung'd and limber-lipp'd from long trial? from vigorous
      practice? from physique?	      practice? from physique?	      practice? from physique?	      practice? from physique?
  Do you move in these broad lands as broad as they?	  Do you move in these broad lands as broad as they?	  Do you move in these broad lands as broad as they?	  Do you move in these broad lands as broad as they?
  Come duly to the divine power to speak words?	  Come duly to the divine power to speak words?	  Come duly to the divine power to speak words?	  Come duly to the divine power to speak words?
  For only at last after many years, after chastity, friendship,	  For only at last after many years, after chastity, friendship,	  For only at last after many years, after chastity, friendship,	  For only at last after many years, after chastity, friendship,
      procreation, prudence, and nakedness,	      procreation, prudence, and nakedness,	      procreation, prudence, and nakedness,	      procreation, prudence, and nakedness,
  After treading ground and breasting river and lake,	  After treading ground and breasting river and lake,	  After treading ground and breasting river and lake,	  After treading ground and breasting river and lake,
  After a loosen'd throat, after absorbing eras, temperaments, races,	  After a loosen'd throat, after absorbing eras, temperaments, races,	  After a loosen'd throat, after absorbing eras, temperaments, races,	  After a loosen'd throat, after absorbing eras, temperaments, races,
      after knowledge, freedom, crimes,	      after knowledge, freedom, crimes,	      after knowledge, freedom, crimes,	      after knowledge, freedom, crimes,
  After complete faith, after clarifyings, elevations, and removing	  After complete faith, after clarifyings, elevations, and removing	  After complete faith, after clarifyings, elevations, and removing	  After complete faith, after clarifyings, elevations, and removing
      obstructions,	      obstructions,	      obstructions,	      obstructions,
  After these and more, it is just possible there comes to a man,	  After these and more, it is just possible there comes to a man,	  After these and more, it is just possible there comes to a man,	  After these and more, it is just possible there comes to a man,
      woman, the divine power to speak words;	      woman, the divine power to speak words;	      woman, the divine power to speak words;	      woman, the divine power to speak words;
  Then toward that man or that woman swiftly hasten all--none	  Then toward that man or that woman swiftly hasten all--none	  Then toward that man or that woman swiftly hasten all--none	  Then toward that man or that woman swiftly hasten all--none
      refuse, all attend,	      refuse, all attend,	      refuse, all attend,	      refuse, all attend,
  Armies, ships, antiquities, libraries, paintings, machines, cities,	  Armies, ships, antiquities, libraries, paintings, machines, cities,	  Armies, ships, antiquities, libraries, paintings, machines, cities,	  Armies, ships, antiquities, libraries, paintings, machines, cities,
      hate, despair, amity, pain, theft, murder, aspiration, form in	      hate, despair, amity, pain, theft, murder, aspiration, form in	      hate, despair, amity, pain, theft, murder, aspiration, form in	      hate, despair, amity, pain, theft, murder, aspiration, form in
      close ranks,	      close ranks,	      close ranks,	      close ranks,
  They debouch as they are wanted to march obediently through the	  They debouch as they are wanted to march obediently through the	  They debouch as they are wanted to march obediently through the	  They debouch as they are wanted to march obediently through the
      mouth of that man or that woman.	      mouth of that man or that woman.	      mouth of that man or that woman.	      mouth of that man or that woman.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  O what is it in me that makes me tremble so at voices?	  O what is it in me that makes me tremble so at voices?	  O what is it in me that makes me tremble so at voices?	  O what is it in me that makes me tremble so at voices?
  Surely whoever speaks to me in the right voice, him or her I shall follow,	  Surely whoever speaks to me in the right voice, him or her I shall follow,	  Surely whoever speaks to me in the right voice, him or her I shall follow,	  Surely whoever speaks to me in the right voice, him or her I shall follow,
  As the water follows the moon, silently, with fluid steps, anywhere	  As the water follows the moon, silently, with fluid steps, anywhere	  As the water follows the moon, silently, with fluid steps, anywhere	  As the water follows the moon, silently, with fluid steps, anywhere
      around the globe.	      around the globe.	      around the globe.	      around the globe.
			
  All waits for the right voices;	  All waits for the right voices;	  All waits for the right voices;	  All waits for the right voices;
  Where is the practis'd and perfect organ? where is the develop'd soul?	  Where is the practis'd and perfect organ? where is the develop'd soul?	  Where is the practis'd and perfect organ? where is the develop'd soul?	  Where is the practis'd and perfect organ? where is the develop'd soul?
  For I see every word utter'd thence has deeper, sweeter, new sounds,	  For I see every word utter'd thence has deeper, sweeter, new sounds,	  For I see every word utter'd thence has deeper, sweeter, new sounds,	  For I see every word utter'd thence has deeper, sweeter, new sounds,
      impossible on less terms.	      impossible on less terms.	      impossible on less terms.	      impossible on less terms.
			
  I see brains and lips closed, tympans and temples unstruck,	  I see brains and lips closed, tympans and temples unstruck,	  I see brains and lips closed, tympans and temples unstruck,	  I see brains and lips closed, tympans and temples unstruck,
  Until that comes which has the quality to strike and to unclose,	  Until that comes which has the quality to strike and to unclose,	  Until that comes which has the quality to strike and to unclose,	  Until that comes which has the quality to strike and to unclose,
  Until that comes which has the quality to bring forth what lies	  Until that comes which has the quality to bring forth what lies	  Until that comes which has the quality to bring forth what lies	  Until that comes which has the quality to bring forth what lies
      slumbering forever ready in all words.	      slumbering forever ready in all words.	      slumbering forever ready in all words.	      slumbering forever ready in all words.
			
			
			
			
To Him That Was Crucified	To Him That Was Crucified	To Him That Was Crucified	To Him That Was Crucified
			
  My spirit to yours dear brother,	  My spirit to yours dear brother,	  My spirit to yours dear brother,	  My spirit to yours dear brother,
  Do not mind because many sounding your name do not understand you,	  Do not mind because many sounding your name do not understand you,	  Do not mind because many sounding your name do not understand you,	  Do not mind because many sounding your name do not understand you,
  I do not sound your name, but I understand you,	  I do not sound your name, but I understand you,	  I do not sound your name, but I understand you,	  I do not sound your name, but I understand you,
  I specify you with joy O my comrade to salute you, and to salute	  I specify you with joy O my comrade to salute you, and to salute	  I specify you with joy O my comrade to salute you, and to salute	  I specify you with joy O my comrade to salute you, and to salute
      those who are with you, before and since, and those to come also,	      those who are with you, before and since, and those to come also,	      those who are with you, before and since, and those to come also,	      those who are with you, before and since, and those to come also,
  That we all labor together transmitting the same charge and succession,	  That we all labor together transmitting the same charge and succession,	  That we all labor together transmitting the same charge and succession,	  That we all labor together transmitting the same charge and succession,
  We few equals indifferent of lands, indifferent of times,	  We few equals indifferent of lands, indifferent of times,	  We few equals indifferent of lands, indifferent of times,	  We few equals indifferent of lands, indifferent of times,
  We, enclosers of all continents, all castes, allowers of all theologies,	  We, enclosers of all continents, all castes, allowers of all theologies,	  We, enclosers of all continents, all castes, allowers of all theologies,	  We, enclosers of all continents, all castes, allowers of all theologies,
  Compassionaters, perceivers, rapport of men,	  Compassionaters, perceivers, rapport of men,	  Compassionaters, perceivers, rapport of men,	  Compassionaters, perceivers, rapport of men,
  We walk silent among disputes and assertions, but reject not the	  We walk silent among disputes and assertions, but reject not the	  We walk silent among disputes and assertions, but reject not the	  We walk silent among disputes and assertions, but reject not the
      disputers nor any thing that is asserted,	      disputers nor any thing that is asserted,	      disputers nor any thing that is asserted,	      disputers nor any thing that is asserted,
  We hear the bawling and din, we are reach'd at by divisions,	  We hear the bawling and din, we are reach'd at by divisions,	  We hear the bawling and din, we are reach'd at by divisions,	  We hear the bawling and din, we are reach'd at by divisions,
      jealousies, recriminations on every side,	      jealousies, recriminations on every side,	      jealousies, recriminations on every side,	      jealousies, recriminations on every side,
  They close peremptorily upon us to surround us, my comrade,	  They close peremptorily upon us to surround us, my comrade,	  They close peremptorily upon us to surround us, my comrade,	  They close peremptorily upon us to surround us, my comrade,
  Yet we walk unheld, free, the whole earth over, journeying up and	  Yet we walk unheld, free, the whole earth over, journeying up and	  Yet we walk unheld, free, the whole earth over, journeying up and	  Yet we walk unheld, free, the whole earth over, journeying up and
      down till we make our ineffaceable mark upon time and the diverse eras,	      down till we make our ineffaceable mark upon time and the diverse eras,	      down till we make our ineffaceable mark upon time and the diverse eras,	      down till we make our ineffaceable mark upon time and the diverse eras,
  Till we saturate time and eras, that the men and women of races,	  Till we saturate time and eras, that the men and women of races,	  Till we saturate time and eras, that the men and women of races,	  Till we saturate time and eras, that the men and women of races,
      ages to come, may prove brethren and lovers as we are.	      ages to come, may prove brethren and lovers as we are.	      ages to come, may prove brethren and lovers as we are.	      ages to come, may prove brethren and lovers as we are.
			
			
			
			
You Felons on Trial in Courts	You Felons on Trial in Courts	You Felons on Trial in Courts	You Felons on Trial in Courts
			
  You felons on trial in courts,	  You felons on trial in courts,	  You felons on trial in courts,	  You felons on trial in courts,
  You convicts in prison-cells, you sentenced assassins chain'd and	  You convicts in prison-cells, you sentenced assassins chain'd and	  You convicts in prison-cells, you sentenced assassins chain'd and	  You convicts in prison-cells, you sentenced assassins chain'd and
      handcuff'd with iron,	      handcuff'd with iron,	      handcuff'd with iron,	      handcuff'd with iron,
  Who am I too that I am not on trial or in prison?	  Who am I too that I am not on trial or in prison?	  Who am I too that I am not on trial or in prison?	  Who am I too that I am not on trial or in prison?
  Me ruthless and devilish as any, that my wrists are not chain'd with	  Me ruthless and devilish as any, that my wrists are not chain'd with	  Me ruthless and devilish as any, that my wrists are not chain'd with	  Me ruthless and devilish as any, that my wrists are not chain'd with
      iron, or my ankles with iron?	      iron, or my ankles with iron?	      iron, or my ankles with iron?	      iron, or my ankles with iron?
			
  You prostitutes flaunting over the trottoirs or obscene in your rooms,	  You prostitutes flaunting over the trottoirs or obscene in your rooms,	  You prostitutes flaunting over the trottoirs or obscene in your rooms,	  You prostitutes flaunting over the trottoirs or obscene in your rooms,
  Who am I that I should call you more obscene than myself?	  Who am I that I should call you more obscene than myself?	  Who am I that I should call you more obscene than myself?	  Who am I that I should call you more obscene than myself?
			
  O culpable! I acknowledge--I expose!	  O culpable! I acknowledge--I expose!	  O culpable! I acknowledge--I expose!	  O culpable! I acknowledge--I expose!
  (O admirers, praise not me--compliment not me--you make me wince,	  (O admirers, praise not me--compliment not me--you make me wince,	  (O admirers, praise not me--compliment not me--you make me wince,	  (O admirers, praise not me--compliment not me--you make me wince,
  I see what you do not--I know what you do not.)	  I see what you do not--I know what you do not.)	  I see what you do not--I know what you do not.)	  I see what you do not--I know what you do not.)
			
  Inside these breast-bones I lie smutch'd and choked,	  Inside these breast-bones I lie smutch'd and choked,	  Inside these breast-bones I lie smutch'd and choked,	  Inside these breast-bones I lie smutch'd and choked,
  Beneath this face that appears so impassive hell's tides continually run,	  Beneath this face that appears so impassive hell's tides continually run,	  Beneath this face that appears so impassive hell's tides continually run,	  Beneath this face that appears so impassive hell's tides continually run,
  Lusts and wickedness are acceptable to me,	  Lusts and wickedness are acceptable to me,	  Lusts and wickedness are acceptable to me,	  Lusts and wickedness are acceptable to me,
  I walk with delinquents with passionate love,	  I walk with delinquents with passionate love,	  I walk with delinquents with passionate love,	  I walk with delinquents with passionate love,
  I feel I am of them--I belong to those convicts and prostitutes myself,	  I feel I am of them--I belong to those convicts and prostitutes myself,	  I feel I am of them--I belong to those convicts and prostitutes myself,	  I feel I am of them--I belong to those convicts and prostitutes myself,
  And henceforth I will not deny them--for how can I deny myself?	  And henceforth I will not deny them--for how can I deny myself?	  And henceforth I will not deny them--for how can I deny myself?	  And henceforth I will not deny them--for how can I deny myself?
			
			
			
			
Laws for Creations	Laws for Creations	Laws for Creations	Laws for Creations
			
  Laws for creations,	  Laws for creations,	  Laws for creations,	  Laws for creations,
  For strong artists and leaders, for fresh broods of teachers and	  For strong artists and leaders, for fresh broods of teachers and	  For strong artists and leaders, for fresh broods of teachers and	  For strong artists and leaders, for fresh broods of teachers and
      perfect literats for America,	      perfect literats for America,	      perfect literats for America,	      perfect literats for America,
  For noble savans and coming musicians.	  For noble savans and coming musicians.	  For noble savans and coming musicians.	  For noble savans and coming musicians.
  All must have reference to the ensemble of the world, and the	  All must have reference to the ensemble of the world, and the	  All must have reference to the ensemble of the world, and the	  All must have reference to the ensemble of the world, and the
      compact truth of the world,	      compact truth of the world,	      compact truth of the world,	      compact truth of the world,
  There shall be no subject too pronounced--all works shall illustrate	  There shall be no subject too pronounced--all works shall illustrate	  There shall be no subject too pronounced--all works shall illustrate	  There shall be no subject too pronounced--all works shall illustrate
      the divine law of indirections.	      the divine law of indirections.	      the divine law of indirections.	      the divine law of indirections.
			
  What do you suppose creation is?	  What do you suppose creation is?	  What do you suppose creation is?	  What do you suppose creation is?
  What do you suppose will satisfy the soul, except to walk free and	  What do you suppose will satisfy the soul, except to walk free and	  What do you suppose will satisfy the soul, except to walk free and	  What do you suppose will satisfy the soul, except to walk free and
      own no superior?	      own no superior?	      own no superior?	      own no superior?
  What do you suppose I would intimate to you in a hundred ways, but	  What do you suppose I would intimate to you in a hundred ways, but	  What do you suppose I would intimate to you in a hundred ways, but	  What do you suppose I would intimate to you in a hundred ways, but
      that man or woman is as good as God?	      that man or woman is as good as God?	      that man or woman is as good as God?	      that man or woman is as good as God?
  And that there is no God any more divine than Yourself?	  And that there is no God any more divine than Yourself?	  And that there is no God any more divine than Yourself?	  And that there is no God any more divine than Yourself?
  And that that is what the oldest and newest myths finally mean?	  And that that is what the oldest and newest myths finally mean?	  And that that is what the oldest and newest myths finally mean?	  And that that is what the oldest and newest myths finally mean?
  And that you or any one must approach creations through such laws?	  And that you or any one must approach creations through such laws?	  And that you or any one must approach creations through such laws?	  And that you or any one must approach creations through such laws?
			
			
			
			
To a Common Prostitute	To a Common Prostitute	To a Common Prostitute	To a Common Prostitute
			
  Be composed--be at ease with me--I am Walt Whitman, liberal and	  Be composed--be at ease with me--I am Walt Whitman, liberal and	  Be composed--be at ease with me--I am Walt Whitman, liberal and	  Be composed--be at ease with me--I am Walt Whitman, liberal and
      lusty as Nature,	      lusty as Nature,	      lusty as Nature,	      lusty as Nature,
  Not till the sun excludes you do I exclude you,	  Not till the sun excludes you do I exclude you,	  Not till the sun excludes you do I exclude you,	  Not till the sun excludes you do I exclude you,
  Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you and the leaves to	  Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you and the leaves to	  Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you and the leaves to	  Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you and the leaves to
      rustle for you, do my words refuse to glisten and rustle for you.	      rustle for you, do my words refuse to glisten and rustle for you.	      rustle for you, do my words refuse to glisten and rustle for you.	      rustle for you, do my words refuse to glisten and rustle for you.
			
  My girl I appoint with you an appointment, and I charge you that you	  My girl I appoint with you an appointment, and I charge you that you	  My girl I appoint with you an appointment, and I charge you that you	  My girl I appoint with you an appointment, and I charge you that you
      make preparation to be worthy to meet me,	      make preparation to be worthy to meet me,	      make preparation to be worthy to meet me,	      make preparation to be worthy to meet me,
  And I charge you that you be patient and perfect till I come.	  And I charge you that you be patient and perfect till I come.	  And I charge you that you be patient and perfect till I come.	  And I charge you that you be patient and perfect till I come.
			
  Till then I salute you with a significant look that you do not forget me.	  Till then I salute you with a significant look that you do not forget me.	  Till then I salute you with a significant look that you do not forget me.	  Till then I salute you with a significant look that you do not forget me.
			
			
			
			
I Was Looking a Long While	I Was Looking a Long While	I Was Looking a Long While	I Was Looking a Long While
			
  I was looking a long while for Intentions,	  I was looking a long while for Intentions,	  I was looking a long while for Intentions,	  I was looking a long while for Intentions,
  For a clew to the history of the past for myself, and for these	  For a clew to the history of the past for myself, and for these	  For a clew to the history of the past for myself, and for these	  For a clew to the history of the past for myself, and for these
      chants--and now I have found it,	      chants--and now I have found it,	      chants--and now I have found it,	      chants--and now I have found it,
  It is not in those paged fables in the libraries, (them I neither	  It is not in those paged fables in the libraries, (them I neither	  It is not in those paged fables in the libraries, (them I neither	  It is not in those paged fables in the libraries, (them I neither
      accept nor reject,)	      accept nor reject,)	      accept nor reject,)	      accept nor reject,)
  It is no more in the legends than in all else,	  It is no more in the legends than in all else,	  It is no more in the legends than in all else,	  It is no more in the legends than in all else,
  It is in the present--it is this earth to-day,	  It is in the present--it is this earth to-day,	  It is in the present--it is this earth to-day,	  It is in the present--it is this earth to-day,
  It is in Democracy--(the purport and aim of all the past,)	  It is in Democracy--(the purport and aim of all the past,)	  It is in Democracy--(the purport and aim of all the past,)	  It is in Democracy--(the purport and aim of all the past,)
  It is the life of one man or one woman to-day--the average man of to-day,	  It is the life of one man or one woman to-day--the average man of to-day,	  It is the life of one man or one woman to-day--the average man of to-day,	  It is the life of one man or one woman to-day--the average man of to-day,
  It is in languages, social customs, literatures, arts,	  It is in languages, social customs, literatures, arts,	  It is in languages, social customs, literatures, arts,	  It is in languages, social customs, literatures, arts,
  It is in the broad show of artificial things, ships, machinery,	  It is in the broad show of artificial things, ships, machinery,	  It is in the broad show of artificial things, ships, machinery,	  It is in the broad show of artificial things, ships, machinery,
      politics, creeds, modern improvements, and the interchange of nations,	      politics, creeds, modern improvements, and the interchange of nations,	      politics, creeds, modern improvements, and the interchange of nations,	      politics, creeds, modern improvements, and the interchange of nations,
  All for the modern--all for the average man of to-day.	  All for the modern--all for the average man of to-day.	  All for the modern--all for the average man of to-day.	  All for the modern--all for the average man of to-day.
			
			
			
			
Thought	Thought	Thought	Thought
			
  Of persons arrived at high positions, ceremonies, wealth,	  Of persons arrived at high positions, ceremonies, wealth,	  Of persons arrived at high positions, ceremonies, wealth,	  Of persons arrived at high positions, ceremonies, wealth,
      scholarships, and the like;	      scholarships, and the like;	      scholarships, and the like;	      scholarships, and the like;
  (To me all that those persons have arrived at sinks away from them,	  (To me all that those persons have arrived at sinks away from them,	  (To me all that those persons have arrived at sinks away from them,	  (To me all that those persons have arrived at sinks away from them,
      except as it results to their bodies and souls,	      except as it results to their bodies and souls,	      except as it results to their bodies and souls,	      except as it results to their bodies and souls,
  So that often to me they appear gaunt and naked,	  So that often to me they appear gaunt and naked,	  So that often to me they appear gaunt and naked,	  So that often to me they appear gaunt and naked,
  And often to me each one mocks the others, and mocks himself or herself,	  And often to me each one mocks the others, and mocks himself or herself,	  And often to me each one mocks the others, and mocks himself or herself,	  And often to me each one mocks the others, and mocks himself or herself,
  And of each one the core of life, namely happiness, is full of the	  And of each one the core of life, namely happiness, is full of the	  And of each one the core of life, namely happiness, is full of the	  And of each one the core of life, namely happiness, is full of the
      rotten excrement of maggots,	      rotten excrement of maggots,	      rotten excrement of maggots,	      rotten excrement of maggots,
  And often to me those men and women pass unwittingly the true	  And often to me those men and women pass unwittingly the true	  And often to me those men and women pass unwittingly the true	  And often to me those men and women pass unwittingly the true
      realities of life, and go toward false realities,	      realities of life, and go toward false realities,	      realities of life, and go toward false realities,	      realities of life, and go toward false realities,
  And often to me they are alive after what custom has served them,	  And often to me they are alive after what custom has served them,	  And often to me they are alive after what custom has served them,	  And often to me they are alive after what custom has served them,
      but nothing more,	      but nothing more,	      but nothing more,	      but nothing more,
  And often to me they are sad, hasty, unwaked sonnambules walking the dusk.)	  And often to me they are sad, hasty, unwaked sonnambules walking the dusk.)	  And often to me they are sad, hasty, unwaked sonnambules walking the dusk.)	  And often to me they are sad, hasty, unwaked sonnambules walking the dusk.)
			
			
			
			
Miracles	Miracles	Miracles	Miracles
			
  Why, who makes much of a miracle?	  Why, who makes much of a miracle?	  Why, who makes much of a miracle?	  Why, who makes much of a miracle?
  As to me I know of nothing else but miracles,	  As to me I know of nothing else but miracles,	  As to me I know of nothing else but miracles,	  As to me I know of nothing else but miracles,
  Whether I walk the streets of Manhattan,	  Whether I walk the streets of Manhattan,	  Whether I walk the streets of Manhattan,	  Whether I walk the streets of Manhattan,
  Or dart my sight over the roofs of houses toward the sky,	  Or dart my sight over the roofs of houses toward the sky,	  Or dart my sight over the roofs of houses toward the sky,	  Or dart my sight over the roofs of houses toward the sky,
  Or wade with naked feet along the beach just in the edge of the water,	  Or wade with naked feet along the beach just in the edge of the water,	  Or wade with naked feet along the beach just in the edge of the water,	  Or wade with naked feet along the beach just in the edge of the water,
  Or stand under trees in the woods,	  Or stand under trees in the woods,	  Or stand under trees in the woods,	  Or stand under trees in the woods,
  Or talk by day with any one I love, or sleep in the bed at night	  Or talk by day with any one I love, or sleep in the bed at night	  Or talk by day with any one I love, or sleep in the bed at night	  Or talk by day with any one I love, or sleep in the bed at night
      with any one I love,	      with any one I love,	      with any one I love,	      with any one I love,
  Or sit at table at dinner with the rest,	  Or sit at table at dinner with the rest,	  Or sit at table at dinner with the rest,	  Or sit at table at dinner with the rest,
  Or look at strangers opposite me riding in the car,	  Or look at strangers opposite me riding in the car,	  Or look at strangers opposite me riding in the car,	  Or look at strangers opposite me riding in the car,
  Or watch honey-bees busy around the hive of a summer forenoon,	  Or watch honey-bees busy around the hive of a summer forenoon,	  Or watch honey-bees busy around the hive of a summer forenoon,	  Or watch honey-bees busy around the hive of a summer forenoon,
  Or animals feeding in the fields,	  Or animals feeding in the fields,	  Or animals feeding in the fields,	  Or animals feeding in the fields,
  Or birds, or the wonderfulness of insects in the air,	  Or birds, or the wonderfulness of insects in the air,	  Or birds, or the wonderfulness of insects in the air,	  Or birds, or the wonderfulness of insects in the air,
  Or the wonderfulness of the sundown, or of stars shining so quiet	  Or the wonderfulness of the sundown, or of stars shining so quiet	  Or the wonderfulness of the sundown, or of stars shining so quiet	  Or the wonderfulness of the sundown, or of stars shining so quiet
      and bright,	      and bright,	      and bright,	      and bright,
  Or the exquisite delicate thin curve of the new moon in spring;	  Or the exquisite delicate thin curve of the new moon in spring;	  Or the exquisite delicate thin curve of the new moon in spring;	  Or the exquisite delicate thin curve of the new moon in spring;
  These with the rest, one and all, are to me miracles,	  These with the rest, one and all, are to me miracles,	  These with the rest, one and all, are to me miracles,	  These with the rest, one and all, are to me miracles,
  The whole referring, yet each distinct and in its place.	  The whole referring, yet each distinct and in its place.	  The whole referring, yet each distinct and in its place.	  The whole referring, yet each distinct and in its place.
			
  To me every hour of the light and dark is a miracle,	  To me every hour of the light and dark is a miracle,	  To me every hour of the light and dark is a miracle,	  To me every hour of the light and dark is a miracle,
  Every cubic inch of space is a miracle,	  Every cubic inch of space is a miracle,	  Every cubic inch of space is a miracle,	  Every cubic inch of space is a miracle,
  Every square yard of the surface of the earth is spread with the same,	  Every square yard of the surface of the earth is spread with the same,	  Every square yard of the surface of the earth is spread with the same,	  Every square yard of the surface of the earth is spread with the same,
  Every foot of the interior swarms with the same.	  Every foot of the interior swarms with the same.	  Every foot of the interior swarms with the same.	  Every foot of the interior swarms with the same.
  To me the sea is a continual miracle,	  To me the sea is a continual miracle,	  To me the sea is a continual miracle,	  To me the sea is a continual miracle,
  The fishes that swim--the rocks--the motion of the waves--the	  The fishes that swim--the rocks--the motion of the waves--the	  The fishes that swim--the rocks--the motion of the waves--the	  The fishes that swim--the rocks--the motion of the waves--the
      ships with men in them,	      ships with men in them,	      ships with men in them,	      ships with men in them,
  What stranger miracles are there?	  What stranger miracles are there?	  What stranger miracles are there?	  What stranger miracles are there?
			
			
			
			
Sparkles from the Wheel	Sparkles from the Wheel	Sparkles from the Wheel	Sparkles from the Wheel
			
  Where the city's ceaseless crowd moves on the livelong day,	  Where the city's ceaseless crowd moves on the livelong day,	  Where the city's ceaseless crowd moves on the livelong day,	  Where the city's ceaseless crowd moves on the livelong day,
  Withdrawn I join a group of children watching, I pause aside with them.	  Withdrawn I join a group of children watching, I pause aside with them.	  Withdrawn I join a group of children watching, I pause aside with them.	  Withdrawn I join a group of children watching, I pause aside with them.
			
  By the curb toward the edge of the flagging,	  By the curb toward the edge of the flagging,	  By the curb toward the edge of the flagging,	  By the curb toward the edge of the flagging,
  A knife-grinder works at his wheel sharpening a great knife,	  A knife-grinder works at his wheel sharpening a great knife,	  A knife-grinder works at his wheel sharpening a great knife,	  A knife-grinder works at his wheel sharpening a great knife,
  Bending over he carefully holds it to the stone, by foot and knee,	  Bending over he carefully holds it to the stone, by foot and knee,	  Bending over he carefully holds it to the stone, by foot and knee,	  Bending over he carefully holds it to the stone, by foot and knee,
  With measur'd tread he turns rapidly, as he presses with light but	  With measur'd tread he turns rapidly, as he presses with light but	  With measur'd tread he turns rapidly, as he presses with light but	  With measur'd tread he turns rapidly, as he presses with light but
      firm hand,	      firm hand,	      firm hand,	      firm hand,
  Forth issue then in copious golden jets,	  Forth issue then in copious golden jets,	  Forth issue then in copious golden jets,	  Forth issue then in copious golden jets,
  Sparkles from the wheel.	  Sparkles from the wheel.	  Sparkles from the wheel.	  Sparkles from the wheel.
			
  The scene and all its belongings, how they seize and affect me,	  The scene and all its belongings, how they seize and affect me,	  The scene and all its belongings, how they seize and affect me,	  The scene and all its belongings, how they seize and affect me,
  The sad sharp-chinn'd old man with worn clothes and broad	  The sad sharp-chinn'd old man with worn clothes and broad	  The sad sharp-chinn'd old man with worn clothes and broad	  The sad sharp-chinn'd old man with worn clothes and broad
      shoulder-band of leather,	      shoulder-band of leather,	      shoulder-band of leather,	      shoulder-band of leather,
  Myself effusing and fluid, a phantom curiously floating, now here	  Myself effusing and fluid, a phantom curiously floating, now here	  Myself effusing and fluid, a phantom curiously floating, now here	  Myself effusing and fluid, a phantom curiously floating, now here
      absorb'd and arrested,	      absorb'd and arrested,	      absorb'd and arrested,	      absorb'd and arrested,
  The group, (an unminded point set in a vast surrounding,)	  The group, (an unminded point set in a vast surrounding,)	  The group, (an unminded point set in a vast surrounding,)	  The group, (an unminded point set in a vast surrounding,)
  The attentive, quiet children, the loud, proud, restive base of the streets,	  The attentive, quiet children, the loud, proud, restive base of the streets,	  The attentive, quiet children, the loud, proud, restive base of the streets,	  The attentive, quiet children, the loud, proud, restive base of the streets,
  The low hoarse purr of the whirling stone, the light-press'd blade,	  The low hoarse purr of the whirling stone, the light-press'd blade,	  The low hoarse purr of the whirling stone, the light-press'd blade,	  The low hoarse purr of the whirling stone, the light-press'd blade,
  Diffusing, dropping, sideways-darting, in tiny showers of gold,	  Diffusing, dropping, sideways-darting, in tiny showers of gold,	  Diffusing, dropping, sideways-darting, in tiny showers of gold,	  Diffusing, dropping, sideways-darting, in tiny showers of gold,
  Sparkles from the wheel.	  Sparkles from the wheel.	  Sparkles from the wheel.	  Sparkles from the wheel.
			
			
			
			
To a Pupil	To a Pupil	To a Pupil	To a Pupil
			
  Is reform needed? is it through you?	  Is reform needed? is it through you?	  Is reform needed? is it through you?	  Is reform needed? is it through you?
  The greater the reform needed, the greater the Personality you need	  The greater the reform needed, the greater the Personality you need	  The greater the reform needed, the greater the Personality you need	  The greater the reform needed, the greater the Personality you need
      to accomplish it.	      to accomplish it.	      to accomplish it.	      to accomplish it.
			
  You! do you not see how it would serve to have eyes, blood,	  You! do you not see how it would serve to have eyes, blood,	  You! do you not see how it would serve to have eyes, blood,	  You! do you not see how it would serve to have eyes, blood,
      complexion, clean and sweet?	      complexion, clean and sweet?	      complexion, clean and sweet?	      complexion, clean and sweet?
  Do you not see how it would serve to have such a body and soul that	  Do you not see how it would serve to have such a body and soul that	  Do you not see how it would serve to have such a body and soul that	  Do you not see how it would serve to have such a body and soul that
      when you enter the crowd an atmosphere of desire and command	      when you enter the crowd an atmosphere of desire and command	      when you enter the crowd an atmosphere of desire and command	      when you enter the crowd an atmosphere of desire and command
      enters with you, and every one is impress'd with your Personality?	      enters with you, and every one is impress'd with your Personality?	      enters with you, and every one is impress'd with your Personality?	      enters with you, and every one is impress'd with your Personality?
			
  O the magnet! the flesh over and over!	  O the magnet! the flesh over and over!	  O the magnet! the flesh over and over!	  O the magnet! the flesh over and over!
  Go, dear friend, if need be give up all else, and commence to-day to	  Go, dear friend, if need be give up all else, and commence to-day to	  Go, dear friend, if need be give up all else, and commence to-day to	  Go, dear friend, if need be give up all else, and commence to-day to
      inure yourself to pluck, reality, self-esteem, definiteness,	      inure yourself to pluck, reality, self-esteem, definiteness,	      inure yourself to pluck, reality, self-esteem, definiteness,	      inure yourself to pluck, reality, self-esteem, definiteness,
      elevatedness,	      elevatedness,	      elevatedness,	      elevatedness,
  Rest not till you rivet and publish yourself of your own Personality.	  Rest not till you rivet and publish yourself of your own Personality.	  Rest not till you rivet and publish yourself of your own Personality.	  Rest not till you rivet and publish yourself of your own Personality.
			
			
			
			
Unfolded out of the Folds	Unfolded out of the Folds	Unfolded out of the Folds	Unfolded out of the Folds
			
  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman man comes unfolded, and is	  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman man comes unfolded, and is	  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman man comes unfolded, and is	  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman man comes unfolded, and is
      always to come unfolded,	      always to come unfolded,	      always to come unfolded,	      always to come unfolded,
  Unfolded only out of the superbest woman of the earth is to come the	  Unfolded only out of the superbest woman of the earth is to come the	  Unfolded only out of the superbest woman of the earth is to come the	  Unfolded only out of the superbest woman of the earth is to come the
      superbest man of the earth,	      superbest man of the earth,	      superbest man of the earth,	      superbest man of the earth,
  Unfolded out of the friendliest woman is to come the friendliest man,	  Unfolded out of the friendliest woman is to come the friendliest man,	  Unfolded out of the friendliest woman is to come the friendliest man,	  Unfolded out of the friendliest woman is to come the friendliest man,
  Unfolded only out of the perfect body of a woman can a man be	  Unfolded only out of the perfect body of a woman can a man be	  Unfolded only out of the perfect body of a woman can a man be	  Unfolded only out of the perfect body of a woman can a man be
      form'd of perfect body,	      form'd of perfect body,	      form'd of perfect body,	      form'd of perfect body,
  Unfolded only out of the inimitable poems of woman can come the	  Unfolded only out of the inimitable poems of woman can come the	  Unfolded only out of the inimitable poems of woman can come the	  Unfolded only out of the inimitable poems of woman can come the
      poems of man, (only thence have my poems come;)	      poems of man, (only thence have my poems come;)	      poems of man, (only thence have my poems come;)	      poems of man, (only thence have my poems come;)
  Unfolded out of the strong and arrogant woman I love, only thence	  Unfolded out of the strong and arrogant woman I love, only thence	  Unfolded out of the strong and arrogant woman I love, only thence	  Unfolded out of the strong and arrogant woman I love, only thence
      can appear the strong and arrogant man I love,	      can appear the strong and arrogant man I love,	      can appear the strong and arrogant man I love,	      can appear the strong and arrogant man I love,
  Unfolded by brawny embraces from the well-muscled woman	  Unfolded by brawny embraces from the well-muscled woman	  Unfolded by brawny embraces from the well-muscled woman	  Unfolded by brawny embraces from the well-muscled woman
      love, only thence come the brawny embraces of the man,	      love, only thence come the brawny embraces of the man,	      love, only thence come the brawny embraces of the man,	      love, only thence come the brawny embraces of the man,
  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman's brain come all the folds	  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman's brain come all the folds	  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman's brain come all the folds	  Unfolded out of the folds of the woman's brain come all the folds
      of the man's brain, duly obedient,	      of the man's brain, duly obedient,	      of the man's brain, duly obedient,	      of the man's brain, duly obedient,
  Unfolded out of the justice of the woman all justice is unfolded,	  Unfolded out of the justice of the woman all justice is unfolded,	  Unfolded out of the justice of the woman all justice is unfolded,	  Unfolded out of the justice of the woman all justice is unfolded,
  Unfolded out of the sympathy of the woman is all sympathy;	  Unfolded out of the sympathy of the woman is all sympathy;	  Unfolded out of the sympathy of the woman is all sympathy;	  Unfolded out of the sympathy of the woman is all sympathy;
  A man is a great thing upon the earth and through eternity, but	  A man is a great thing upon the earth and through eternity, but	  A man is a great thing upon the earth and through eternity, but	  A man is a great thing upon the earth and through eternity, but
      every of the greatness of man is unfolded out of woman;	      every of the greatness of man is unfolded out of woman;	      every of the greatness of man is unfolded out of woman;	      every of the greatness of man is unfolded out of woman;
  First the man is shaped in the woman, he can then be shaped in himself.	  First the man is shaped in the woman, he can then be shaped in himself.	  First the man is shaped in the woman, he can then be shaped in himself.	  First the man is shaped in the woman, he can then be shaped in himself.
			
			
			
			
What Am I After All	What Am I After All	What Am I After All	What Am I After All
			
  What am I after all but a child, pleas'd with the sound of my own	  What am I after all but a child, pleas'd with the sound of my own	  What am I after all but a child, pleas'd with the sound of my own	  What am I after all but a child, pleas'd with the sound of my own
      name? repeating it over and over;	      name? repeating it over and over;	      name? repeating it over and over;	      name? repeating it over and over;
  I stand apart to hear--it never tires me.	  I stand apart to hear--it never tires me.	  I stand apart to hear--it never tires me.	  I stand apart to hear--it never tires me.
			
  To you your name also;	  To you your name also;	  To you your name also;	  To you your name also;
  Did you think there was nothing but two or three pronunciations in	  Did you think there was nothing but two or three pronunciations in	  Did you think there was nothing but two or three pronunciations in	  Did you think there was nothing but two or three pronunciations in
      the sound of your name?	      the sound of your name?	      the sound of your name?	      the sound of your name?
			
			
			
			
Kosmos	Kosmos	Kosmos	Kosmos
			
  Who includes diversity and is Nature,	  Who includes diversity and is Nature,	  Who includes diversity and is Nature,	  Who includes diversity and is Nature,
  Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness and sexuality of	  Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness and sexuality of	  Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness and sexuality of	  Who is the amplitude of the earth, and the coarseness and sexuality of
      the earth, and the great charity of the earth, and the equilibrium also,	      the earth, and the great charity of the earth, and the equilibrium also,	      the earth, and the great charity of the earth, and the equilibrium also,	      the earth, and the great charity of the earth, and the equilibrium also,
  Who has not look'd forth from the windows the eyes for nothing,	  Who has not look'd forth from the windows the eyes for nothing,	  Who has not look'd forth from the windows the eyes for nothing,	  Who has not look'd forth from the windows the eyes for nothing,
      or whose brain held audience with messengers for nothing,	      or whose brain held audience with messengers for nothing,	      or whose brain held audience with messengers for nothing,	      or whose brain held audience with messengers for nothing,
  Who contains believers and disbelievers, who is the most majestic lover,	  Who contains believers and disbelievers, who is the most majestic lover,	  Who contains believers and disbelievers, who is the most majestic lover,	  Who contains believers and disbelievers, who is the most majestic lover,
  Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of realism,	  Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of realism,	  Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of realism,	  Who holds duly his or her triune proportion of realism,
      spiritualism, and of the aesthetic or intellectual,	      spiritualism, and of the aesthetic or intellectual,	      spiritualism, and of the aesthetic or intellectual,	      spiritualism, and of the aesthetic or intellectual,
  Who having consider'd the body finds all its organs and parts good,	  Who having consider'd the body finds all its organs and parts good,	  Who having consider'd the body finds all its organs and parts good,	  Who having consider'd the body finds all its organs and parts good,
  Who, out of the theory of the earth and of his or her body	  Who, out of the theory of the earth and of his or her body	  Who, out of the theory of the earth and of his or her body	  Who, out of the theory of the earth and of his or her body
      understands by subtle analogies all other theories,	      understands by subtle analogies all other theories,	      understands by subtle analogies all other theories,	      understands by subtle analogies all other theories,
  The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large politics of these States;	  The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large politics of these States;	  The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large politics of these States;	  The theory of a city, a poem, and of the large politics of these States;
  Who believes not only in our globe with its sun and moon, but in	  Who believes not only in our globe with its sun and moon, but in	  Who believes not only in our globe with its sun and moon, but in	  Who believes not only in our globe with its sun and moon, but in
      other globes with their suns and moons,	      other globes with their suns and moons,	      other globes with their suns and moons,	      other globes with their suns and moons,
  Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not for a day	  Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not for a day	  Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not for a day	  Who, constructing the house of himself or herself, not for a day
      but for all time, sees races, eras, dates, generations,	      but for all time, sees races, eras, dates, generations,	      but for all time, sees races, eras, dates, generations,	      but for all time, sees races, eras, dates, generations,
  The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, inseparable together.	  The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, inseparable together.	  The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, inseparable together.	  The past, the future, dwelling there, like space, inseparable together.
			
			
			
			
Others May Praise What They Like	Others May Praise What They Like	Others May Praise What They Like	Others May Praise What They Like
			
  Others may praise what they like;	  Others may praise what they like;	  Others may praise what they like;	  Others may praise what they like;
  But I, from the banks of the running Missouri, praise nothing in art	  But I, from the banks of the running Missouri, praise nothing in art	  But I, from the banks of the running Missouri, praise nothing in art	  But I, from the banks of the running Missouri, praise nothing in art
      or aught else,	      or aught else,	      or aught else,	      or aught else,
  Till it has well inhaled the atmosphere of this river, also the	  Till it has well inhaled the atmosphere of this river, also the	  Till it has well inhaled the atmosphere of this river, also the	  Till it has well inhaled the atmosphere of this river, also the
      western prairie-scent,	      western prairie-scent,	      western prairie-scent,	      western prairie-scent,
  And exudes it all again.	  And exudes it all again.	  And exudes it all again.	  And exudes it all again.
			
			
			
			
Who Learns My Lesson Complete?	Who Learns My Lesson Complete?	Who Learns My Lesson Complete?	Who Learns My Lesson Complete?
			
  Who learns my lesson complete?	  Who learns my lesson complete?	  Who learns my lesson complete?	  Who learns my lesson complete?
  Boss, journeyman, apprentice, churchman and atheist,	  Boss, journeyman, apprentice, churchman and atheist,	  Boss, journeyman, apprentice, churchman and atheist,	  Boss, journeyman, apprentice, churchman and atheist,
  The stupid and the wise thinker, parents and offspring, merchant,	  The stupid and the wise thinker, parents and offspring, merchant,	  The stupid and the wise thinker, parents and offspring, merchant,	  The stupid and the wise thinker, parents and offspring, merchant,
      clerk, porter and customer,	      clerk, porter and customer,	      clerk, porter and customer,	      clerk, porter and customer,
  Editor, author, artist, and schoolboy--draw nigh and commence;	  Editor, author, artist, and schoolboy--draw nigh and commence;	  Editor, author, artist, and schoolboy--draw nigh and commence;	  Editor, author, artist, and schoolboy--draw nigh and commence;
  It is no lesson--it lets down the bars to a good lesson,	  It is no lesson--it lets down the bars to a good lesson,	  It is no lesson--it lets down the bars to a good lesson,	  It is no lesson--it lets down the bars to a good lesson,
  And that to another, and every one to another still.	  And that to another, and every one to another still.	  And that to another, and every one to another still.	  And that to another, and every one to another still.
			
  The great laws take and effuse without argument,	  The great laws take and effuse without argument,	  The great laws take and effuse without argument,	  The great laws take and effuse without argument,
  I am of the same style, for I am their friend,	  I am of the same style, for I am their friend,	  I am of the same style, for I am their friend,	  I am of the same style, for I am their friend,
  I love them quits and quits, I do not halt and make salaams.	  I love them quits and quits, I do not halt and make salaams.	  I love them quits and quits, I do not halt and make salaams.	  I love them quits and quits, I do not halt and make salaams.
			
  I lie abstracted and hear beautiful tales of things and the reasons	  I lie abstracted and hear beautiful tales of things and the reasons	  I lie abstracted and hear beautiful tales of things and the reasons	  I lie abstracted and hear beautiful tales of things and the reasons
      of things,	      of things,	      of things,	      of things,
  They are so beautiful I nudge myself to listen.	  They are so beautiful I nudge myself to listen.	  They are so beautiful I nudge myself to listen.	  They are so beautiful I nudge myself to listen.
			
  I cannot say to any person what I hear--I cannot say it to myself--	  I cannot say to any person what I hear--I cannot say it to myself--	  I cannot say to any person what I hear--I cannot say it to myself--	  I cannot say to any person what I hear--I cannot say it to myself--
      it is very wonderful.	      it is very wonderful.	      it is very wonderful.	      it is very wonderful.
			
  It is no small matter, this round and delicious globe moving so	  It is no small matter, this round and delicious globe moving so	  It is no small matter, this round and delicious globe moving so	  It is no small matter, this round and delicious globe moving so
      exactly in its orbit for ever and ever, without one jolt or	      exactly in its orbit for ever and ever, without one jolt or	      exactly in its orbit for ever and ever, without one jolt or	      exactly in its orbit for ever and ever, without one jolt or
      the untruth of a single second,	      the untruth of a single second,	      the untruth of a single second,	      the untruth of a single second,
  I do not think it was made in six days, nor in ten thousand years,	  I do not think it was made in six days, nor in ten thousand years,	  I do not think it was made in six days, nor in ten thousand years,	  I do not think it was made in six days, nor in ten thousand years,
      nor ten billions of years,	      nor ten billions of years,	      nor ten billions of years,	      nor ten billions of years,
  Nor plann'd and built one thing after another as an architect plans	  Nor plann'd and built one thing after another as an architect plans	  Nor plann'd and built one thing after another as an architect plans	  Nor plann'd and built one thing after another as an architect plans
      and builds a house.	      and builds a house.	      and builds a house.	      and builds a house.
			
  I do not think seventy years is the time of a man or woman,	  I do not think seventy years is the time of a man or woman,	  I do not think seventy years is the time of a man or woman,	  I do not think seventy years is the time of a man or woman,
  Nor that seventy millions of years is the time of a man or woman,	  Nor that seventy millions of years is the time of a man or woman,	  Nor that seventy millions of years is the time of a man or woman,	  Nor that seventy millions of years is the time of a man or woman,
  Nor that years will ever stop the existence of me, or any one else.	  Nor that years will ever stop the existence of me, or any one else.	  Nor that years will ever stop the existence of me, or any one else.	  Nor that years will ever stop the existence of me, or any one else.
			
  Is it wonderful that I should be immortal? as every one is immortal;	  Is it wonderful that I should be immortal? as every one is immortal;	  Is it wonderful that I should be immortal? as every one is immortal;	  Is it wonderful that I should be immortal? as every one is immortal;
  I know it is wonderful, but my eyesight is equally wonderful, and	  I know it is wonderful, but my eyesight is equally wonderful, and	  I know it is wonderful, but my eyesight is equally wonderful, and	  I know it is wonderful, but my eyesight is equally wonderful, and
      how I was conceived in my mother's womb is equally wonderful,	      how I was conceived in my mother's womb is equally wonderful,	      how I was conceived in my mother's womb is equally wonderful,	      how I was conceived in my mother's womb is equally wonderful,
  And pass'd from a babe in the creeping trance of a couple of	  And pass'd from a babe in the creeping trance of a couple of	  And pass'd from a babe in the creeping trance of a couple of	  And pass'd from a babe in the creeping trance of a couple of
      summers and winters to articulate and walk--all this is	      summers and winters to articulate and walk--all this is	      summers and winters to articulate and walk--all this is	      summers and winters to articulate and walk--all this is
      equally wonderful.	      equally wonderful.	      equally wonderful.	      equally wonderful.
			
  And that my soul embraces you this hour, and we affect each other	  And that my soul embraces you this hour, and we affect each other	  And that my soul embraces you this hour, and we affect each other	  And that my soul embraces you this hour, and we affect each other
      without ever seeing each other, and never perhaps to see	      without ever seeing each other, and never perhaps to see	      without ever seeing each other, and never perhaps to see	      without ever seeing each other, and never perhaps to see
      each other, is every bit as wonderful.	      each other, is every bit as wonderful.	      each other, is every bit as wonderful.	      each other, is every bit as wonderful.
			
  And that I can think such thoughts as these is just as wonderful,	  And that I can think such thoughts as these is just as wonderful,	  And that I can think such thoughts as these is just as wonderful,	  And that I can think such thoughts as these is just as wonderful,
  And that I can remind you, and you think them and know them to	  And that I can remind you, and you think them and know them to	  And that I can remind you, and you think them and know them to	  And that I can remind you, and you think them and know them to
      be true, is just as wonderful.	      be true, is just as wonderful.	      be true, is just as wonderful.	      be true, is just as wonderful.
			
  And that the moon spins round the earth and on with the earth, is	  And that the moon spins round the earth and on with the earth, is	  And that the moon spins round the earth and on with the earth, is	  And that the moon spins round the earth and on with the earth, is
      equally wonderful,	      equally wonderful,	      equally wonderful,	      equally wonderful,
  And that they balance themselves with the sun and stars is equally	  And that they balance themselves with the sun and stars is equally	  And that they balance themselves with the sun and stars is equally	  And that they balance themselves with the sun and stars is equally
      wonderful.	      wonderful.	      wonderful.	      wonderful.
			
			
			
			
Tests	Tests	Tests	Tests
			
  All submit to them where they sit, inner, secure, unapproachable to	  All submit to them where they sit, inner, secure, unapproachable to	  All submit to them where they sit, inner, secure, unapproachable to	  All submit to them where they sit, inner, secure, unapproachable to
      analysis in the soul,	      analysis in the soul,	      analysis in the soul,	      analysis in the soul,
  Not traditions, not the outer authorities are the judges,	  Not traditions, not the outer authorities are the judges,	  Not traditions, not the outer authorities are the judges,	  Not traditions, not the outer authorities are the judges,
  They are the judges of outer authorities and of all traditions,	  They are the judges of outer authorities and of all traditions,	  They are the judges of outer authorities and of all traditions,	  They are the judges of outer authorities and of all traditions,
  They corroborate as they go only whatever corroborates themselves,	  They corroborate as they go only whatever corroborates themselves,	  They corroborate as they go only whatever corroborates themselves,	  They corroborate as they go only whatever corroborates themselves,
      and touches themselves;	      and touches themselves;	      and touches themselves;	      and touches themselves;
  For all that, they have it forever in themselves to corroborate far	  For all that, they have it forever in themselves to corroborate far	  For all that, they have it forever in themselves to corroborate far	  For all that, they have it forever in themselves to corroborate far
      and near without one exception.	      and near without one exception.	      and near without one exception.	      and near without one exception.
			
			
			
			
The Torch	The Torch	The Torch	The Torch
			
  On my Northwest coast in the midst of the night a fishermen's group	  On my Northwest coast in the midst of the night a fishermen's group	  On my Northwest coast in the midst of the night a fishermen's group	  On my Northwest coast in the midst of the night a fishermen's group
      stands watching,	      stands watching,	      stands watching,	      stands watching,
  Out on the lake that expands before them, others are spearing salmon,	  Out on the lake that expands before them, others are spearing salmon,	  Out on the lake that expands before them, others are spearing salmon,	  Out on the lake that expands before them, others are spearing salmon,
  The canoe, a dim shadowy thing, moves across the black water,	  The canoe, a dim shadowy thing, moves across the black water,	  The canoe, a dim shadowy thing, moves across the black water,	  The canoe, a dim shadowy thing, moves across the black water,
  Bearing a torch ablaze at the prow.	  Bearing a torch ablaze at the prow.	  Bearing a torch ablaze at the prow.	  Bearing a torch ablaze at the prow.
			
			
			
			
O Star of France [1870-71]	O Star of France [1870-71]	O Star of France [1870-71]	O Star of France [1870-71]
			
  O star of France,	  O star of France,	  O star of France,	  O star of France,
  The brightness of thy hope and strength and fame,	  The brightness of thy hope and strength and fame,	  The brightness of thy hope and strength and fame,	  The brightness of thy hope and strength and fame,
  Like some proud ship that led the fleet so long,	  Like some proud ship that led the fleet so long,	  Like some proud ship that led the fleet so long,	  Like some proud ship that led the fleet so long,
  Beseems to-day a wreck driven by the gale, a mastless hulk,	  Beseems to-day a wreck driven by the gale, a mastless hulk,	  Beseems to-day a wreck driven by the gale, a mastless hulk,	  Beseems to-day a wreck driven by the gale, a mastless hulk,
  And 'mid its teeming madden'd half-drown'd crowds,	  And 'mid its teeming madden'd half-drown'd crowds,	  And 'mid its teeming madden'd half-drown'd crowds,	  And 'mid its teeming madden'd half-drown'd crowds,
  Nor helm nor helmsman.	  Nor helm nor helmsman.	  Nor helm nor helmsman.	  Nor helm nor helmsman.
			
  Dim smitten star,	  Dim smitten star,	  Dim smitten star,	  Dim smitten star,
  Orb not of France alone, pale symbol of my soul, its dearest hopes,	  Orb not of France alone, pale symbol of my soul, its dearest hopes,	  Orb not of France alone, pale symbol of my soul, its dearest hopes,	  Orb not of France alone, pale symbol of my soul, its dearest hopes,
  The struggle and the daring, rage divine for liberty,	  The struggle and the daring, rage divine for liberty,	  The struggle and the daring, rage divine for liberty,	  The struggle and the daring, rage divine for liberty,
  Of aspirations toward the far ideal, enthusiast's dreams of brotherhood,	  Of aspirations toward the far ideal, enthusiast's dreams of brotherhood,	  Of aspirations toward the far ideal, enthusiast's dreams of brotherhood,	  Of aspirations toward the far ideal, enthusiast's dreams of brotherhood,
  Of terror to the tyrant and the priest.	  Of terror to the tyrant and the priest.	  Of terror to the tyrant and the priest.	  Of terror to the tyrant and the priest.
			
  Star crucified--by traitors sold,	  Star crucified--by traitors sold,	  Star crucified--by traitors sold,	  Star crucified--by traitors sold,
  Star panting o'er a land of death, heroic land,	  Star panting o'er a land of death, heroic land,	  Star panting o'er a land of death, heroic land,	  Star panting o'er a land of death, heroic land,
  Strange, passionate, mocking, frivolous land.	  Strange, passionate, mocking, frivolous land.	  Strange, passionate, mocking, frivolous land.	  Strange, passionate, mocking, frivolous land.
			
  Miserable! yet for thy errors, vanities, sins, I will not now rebuke thee,	  Miserable! yet for thy errors, vanities, sins, I will not now rebuke thee,	  Miserable! yet for thy errors, vanities, sins, I will not now rebuke thee,	  Miserable! yet for thy errors, vanities, sins, I will not now rebuke thee,
  Thy unexampled woes and pangs have quell'd them all,	  Thy unexampled woes and pangs have quell'd them all,	  Thy unexampled woes and pangs have quell'd them all,	  Thy unexampled woes and pangs have quell'd them all,
  And left thee sacred.	  And left thee sacred.	  And left thee sacred.	  And left thee sacred.
			
  In that amid thy many faults thou ever aimedst highly,	  In that amid thy many faults thou ever aimedst highly,	  In that amid thy many faults thou ever aimedst highly,	  In that amid thy many faults thou ever aimedst highly,
  In that thou wouldst not really sell thyself however great the price,	  In that thou wouldst not really sell thyself however great the price,	  In that thou wouldst not really sell thyself however great the price,	  In that thou wouldst not really sell thyself however great the price,
  In that thou surely wakedst weeping from thy drugg'd sleep,	  In that thou surely wakedst weeping from thy drugg'd sleep,	  In that thou surely wakedst weeping from thy drugg'd sleep,	  In that thou surely wakedst weeping from thy drugg'd sleep,
  In that alone among thy sisters thou, giantess, didst rend the ones	  In that alone among thy sisters thou, giantess, didst rend the ones	  In that alone among thy sisters thou, giantess, didst rend the ones	  In that alone among thy sisters thou, giantess, didst rend the ones
      that shamed thee,	      that shamed thee,	      that shamed thee,	      that shamed thee,
  In that thou couldst not, wouldst not, wear the usual chains,	  In that thou couldst not, wouldst not, wear the usual chains,	  In that thou couldst not, wouldst not, wear the usual chains,	  In that thou couldst not, wouldst not, wear the usual chains,
  This cross, thy livid face, thy pierced hands and feet,	  This cross, thy livid face, thy pierced hands and feet,	  This cross, thy livid face, thy pierced hands and feet,	  This cross, thy livid face, thy pierced hands and feet,
  The spear thrust in thy side.	  The spear thrust in thy side.	  The spear thrust in thy side.	  The spear thrust in thy side.
			
  O star! O ship of France, beat back and baffled long!	  O star! O ship of France, beat back and baffled long!	  O star! O ship of France, beat back and baffled long!	  O star! O ship of France, beat back and baffled long!
  Bear up O smitten orb! O ship continue on!	  Bear up O smitten orb! O ship continue on!	  Bear up O smitten orb! O ship continue on!	  Bear up O smitten orb! O ship continue on!
			
  Sure as the ship of all, the Earth itself,	  Sure as the ship of all, the Earth itself,	  Sure as the ship of all, the Earth itself,	  Sure as the ship of all, the Earth itself,
  Product of deathly fire and turbulent chaos,	  Product of deathly fire and turbulent chaos,	  Product of deathly fire and turbulent chaos,	  Product of deathly fire and turbulent chaos,
  Forth from its spasms of fury and its poisons,	  Forth from its spasms of fury and its poisons,	  Forth from its spasms of fury and its poisons,	  Forth from its spasms of fury and its poisons,
  Issuing at last in perfect power and beauty,	  Issuing at last in perfect power and beauty,	  Issuing at last in perfect power and beauty,	  Issuing at last in perfect power and beauty,
  Onward beneath the sun following its course,	  Onward beneath the sun following its course,	  Onward beneath the sun following its course,	  Onward beneath the sun following its course,
  So thee O ship of France!	  So thee O ship of France!	  So thee O ship of France!	  So thee O ship of France!
			
  Finish'd the days, the clouds dispel'd	  Finish'd the days, the clouds dispel'd	  Finish'd the days, the clouds dispel'd	  Finish'd the days, the clouds dispel'd
  The travail o'er, the long-sought extrication,	  The travail o'er, the long-sought extrication,	  The travail o'er, the long-sought extrication,	  The travail o'er, the long-sought extrication,
  When lo! reborn, high o'er the European world,	  When lo! reborn, high o'er the European world,	  When lo! reborn, high o'er the European world,	  When lo! reborn, high o'er the European world,
  (In gladness answering thence, as face afar to face, reflecting ours	  (In gladness answering thence, as face afar to face, reflecting ours	  (In gladness answering thence, as face afar to face, reflecting ours	  (In gladness answering thence, as face afar to face, reflecting ours
      Columbia,)	      Columbia,)	      Columbia,)	      Columbia,)
  Again thy star O France, fair lustrous star,	  Again thy star O France, fair lustrous star,	  Again thy star O France, fair lustrous star,	  Again thy star O France, fair lustrous star,
  In heavenly peace, clearer, more bright than ever,	  In heavenly peace, clearer, more bright than ever,	  In heavenly peace, clearer, more bright than ever,	  In heavenly peace, clearer, more bright than ever,
  Shall beam immortal.	  Shall beam immortal.	  Shall beam immortal.	  Shall beam immortal.
			
			
			
			
The Ox-Tamer	The Ox-Tamer	The Ox-Tamer	The Ox-Tamer
			
  In a far-away northern county in the placid pastoral region,	  In a far-away northern county in the placid pastoral region,	  In a far-away northern county in the placid pastoral region,	  In a far-away northern county in the placid pastoral region,
  Lives my farmer friend, the theme of my recitative, a famous tamer of oxen,	  Lives my farmer friend, the theme of my recitative, a famous tamer of oxen,	  Lives my farmer friend, the theme of my recitative, a famous tamer of oxen,	  Lives my farmer friend, the theme of my recitative, a famous tamer of oxen,
  There they bring him the three-year-olds and the four-year-olds to	  There they bring him the three-year-olds and the four-year-olds to	  There they bring him the three-year-olds and the four-year-olds to	  There they bring him the three-year-olds and the four-year-olds to
      break them,	      break them,	      break them,	      break them,
  He will take the wildest steer in the world and break him and tame him,	  He will take the wildest steer in the world and break him and tame him,	  He will take the wildest steer in the world and break him and tame him,	  He will take the wildest steer in the world and break him and tame him,
  He will go fearless without any whip where the young bullock	  He will go fearless without any whip where the young bullock	  He will go fearless without any whip where the young bullock	  He will go fearless without any whip where the young bullock
      chafes up and down the yard,	      chafes up and down the yard,	      chafes up and down the yard,	      chafes up and down the yard,
  The bullock's head tosses restless high in the air with raging eyes,	  The bullock's head tosses restless high in the air with raging eyes,	  The bullock's head tosses restless high in the air with raging eyes,	  The bullock's head tosses restless high in the air with raging eyes,
  Yet see you! how soon his rage subsides--how soon this tamer tames him;	  Yet see you! how soon his rage subsides--how soon this tamer tames him;	  Yet see you! how soon his rage subsides--how soon this tamer tames him;	  Yet see you! how soon his rage subsides--how soon this tamer tames him;
  See you! on the farms hereabout a hundred oxen young and old,	  See you! on the farms hereabout a hundred oxen young and old,	  See you! on the farms hereabout a hundred oxen young and old,	  See you! on the farms hereabout a hundred oxen young and old,
      and he is the man who has tamed them,	      and he is the man who has tamed them,	      and he is the man who has tamed them,	      and he is the man who has tamed them,
  They all know him, all are affectionate to him;	  They all know him, all are affectionate to him;	  They all know him, all are affectionate to him;	  They all know him, all are affectionate to him;
  See you! some are such beautiful animals, so lofty looking;	  See you! some are such beautiful animals, so lofty looking;	  See you! some are such beautiful animals, so lofty looking;	  See you! some are such beautiful animals, so lofty looking;
  Some are buff-color'd, some mottled, one has a white line running	  Some are buff-color'd, some mottled, one has a white line running	  Some are buff-color'd, some mottled, one has a white line running	  Some are buff-color'd, some mottled, one has a white line running
      along his back, some are brindled,	      along his back, some are brindled,	      along his back, some are brindled,	      along his back, some are brindled,
  Some have wide flaring horns (a good sign)--see you! the bright hides,	  Some have wide flaring horns (a good sign)--see you! the bright hides,	  Some have wide flaring horns (a good sign)--see you! the bright hides,	  Some have wide flaring horns (a good sign)--see you! the bright hides,
  See, the two with stars on their foreheads--see, the round bodies	  See, the two with stars on their foreheads--see, the round bodies	  See, the two with stars on their foreheads--see, the round bodies	  See, the two with stars on their foreheads--see, the round bodies
      and broad backs,	      and broad backs,	      and broad backs,	      and broad backs,
  How straight and square they stand on their legs--what fine sagacious eyes!	  How straight and square they stand on their legs--what fine sagacious eyes!	  How straight and square they stand on their legs--what fine sagacious eyes!	  How straight and square they stand on their legs--what fine sagacious eyes!
  How straight they watch their tamer--they wish him near them--how	  How straight they watch their tamer--they wish him near them--how	  How straight they watch their tamer--they wish him near them--how	  How straight they watch their tamer--they wish him near them--how
      they turn to look after him!	      they turn to look after him!	      they turn to look after him!	      they turn to look after him!
  What yearning expression! how uneasy they are when he moves away from them;	  What yearning expression! how uneasy they are when he moves away from them;	  What yearning expression! how uneasy they are when he moves away from them;	  What yearning expression! how uneasy they are when he moves away from them;
  Now I marvel what it can be he appears to them, (books, politics,	  Now I marvel what it can be he appears to them, (books, politics,	  Now I marvel what it can be he appears to them, (books, politics,	  Now I marvel what it can be he appears to them, (books, politics,
      poems, depart--all else departs,)	      poems, depart--all else departs,)	      poems, depart--all else departs,)	      poems, depart--all else departs,)
  I confess I envy only his fascination--my silent, illiterate friend,	  I confess I envy only his fascination--my silent, illiterate friend,	  I confess I envy only his fascination--my silent, illiterate friend,	  I confess I envy only his fascination--my silent, illiterate friend,
  Whom a hundred oxen love there in his life on farms,	  Whom a hundred oxen love there in his life on farms,	  Whom a hundred oxen love there in his life on farms,	  Whom a hundred oxen love there in his life on farms,
  In the northern county far, in the placid pastoral region.	  In the northern county far, in the placid pastoral region.	  In the northern county far, in the placid pastoral region.	  In the northern county far, in the placid pastoral region.
			
			
			
			
An Old Man's Thought of School	An Old Man's Thought of School	An Old Man's Thought of School	An Old Man's Thought of School
  [For the Inauguration of a Public School, Camden, New Jersey, 1874]	  [For the Inauguration of a Public School, Camden, New Jersey, 1874]	  [For the Inauguration of a Public School, Camden, New Jersey, 1874]	  [For the Inauguration of a Public School, Camden, New Jersey, 1874]
			
  An old man's thought of school,	  An old man's thought of school,	  An old man's thought of school,	  An old man's thought of school,
  An old man gathering youthful memories and blooms that youth itself cannot.	  An old man gathering youthful memories and blooms that youth itself cannot.	  An old man gathering youthful memories and blooms that youth itself cannot.	  An old man gathering youthful memories and blooms that youth itself cannot.
			
  Now only do I know you,	  Now only do I know you,	  Now only do I know you,	  Now only do I know you,
  O fair auroral skies--O morning dew upon the grass!	  O fair auroral skies--O morning dew upon the grass!	  O fair auroral skies--O morning dew upon the grass!	  O fair auroral skies--O morning dew upon the grass!
			
  And these I see, these sparkling eyes,	  And these I see, these sparkling eyes,	  And these I see, these sparkling eyes,	  And these I see, these sparkling eyes,
  These stores of mystic meaning, these young lives,	  These stores of mystic meaning, these young lives,	  These stores of mystic meaning, these young lives,	  These stores of mystic meaning, these young lives,
  Building, equipping like a fleet of ships, immortal ships,	  Building, equipping like a fleet of ships, immortal ships,	  Building, equipping like a fleet of ships, immortal ships,	  Building, equipping like a fleet of ships, immortal ships,
  Soon to sail out over the measureless seas,	  Soon to sail out over the measureless seas,	  Soon to sail out over the measureless seas,	  Soon to sail out over the measureless seas,
  On the soul's voyage.	  On the soul's voyage.	  On the soul's voyage.	  On the soul's voyage.
			
  Only a lot of boys and girls?	  Only a lot of boys and girls?	  Only a lot of boys and girls?	  Only a lot of boys and girls?
  Only the tiresome spelling, writing, ciphering classes?	  Only the tiresome spelling, writing, ciphering classes?	  Only the tiresome spelling, writing, ciphering classes?	  Only the tiresome spelling, writing, ciphering classes?
  Only a public school?	  Only a public school?	  Only a public school?	  Only a public school?
			
  Ah more, infinitely more;	  Ah more, infinitely more;	  Ah more, infinitely more;	  Ah more, infinitely more;
  (As George Fox rais'd his warning cry, "Is it this pile of brick and	  (As George Fox rais'd his warning cry, "Is it this pile of brick and	  (As George Fox rais'd his warning cry, "Is it this pile of brick and	  (As George Fox rais'd his warning cry, "Is it this pile of brick and
      mortar, these dead floors, windows, rails, you call the church?	      mortar, these dead floors, windows, rails, you call the church?	      mortar, these dead floors, windows, rails, you call the church?	      mortar, these dead floors, windows, rails, you call the church?
  Why this is not the church at all--the church is living, ever living	  Why this is not the church at all--the church is living, ever living	  Why this is not the church at all--the church is living, ever living	  Why this is not the church at all--the church is living, ever living
      souls.")	      souls.")	      souls.")	      souls.")
			
  And you America,	  And you America,	  And you America,	  And you America,
  Cast you the real reckoning for your present?	  Cast you the real reckoning for your present?	  Cast you the real reckoning for your present?	  Cast you the real reckoning for your present?
  The lights and shadows of your future, good or evil?	  The lights and shadows of your future, good or evil?	  The lights and shadows of your future, good or evil?	  The lights and shadows of your future, good or evil?
  To girlhood, boyhood look, the teacher and the school.	  To girlhood, boyhood look, the teacher and the school.	  To girlhood, boyhood look, the teacher and the school.	  To girlhood, boyhood look, the teacher and the school.
			
			
			
			
Wandering at Morn	Wandering at Morn	Wandering at Morn	Wandering at Morn
			
  Wandering at morn,	  Wandering at morn,	  Wandering at morn,	  Wandering at morn,
  Emerging from the night from gloomy thoughts, thee in my thoughts,	  Emerging from the night from gloomy thoughts, thee in my thoughts,	  Emerging from the night from gloomy thoughts, thee in my thoughts,	  Emerging from the night from gloomy thoughts, thee in my thoughts,
  Yearning for thee harmonious Union! thee, singing bird divine!	  Yearning for thee harmonious Union! thee, singing bird divine!	  Yearning for thee harmonious Union! thee, singing bird divine!	  Yearning for thee harmonious Union! thee, singing bird divine!
  Thee coil'd in evil times my country, with craft and black dismay,	  Thee coil'd in evil times my country, with craft and black dismay,	  Thee coil'd in evil times my country, with craft and black dismay,	  Thee coil'd in evil times my country, with craft and black dismay,
      with every meanness, treason thrust upon thee,	      with every meanness, treason thrust upon thee,	      with every meanness, treason thrust upon thee,	      with every meanness, treason thrust upon thee,
  This common marvel I beheld--the parent thrush I watch'd feeding its young,	  This common marvel I beheld--the parent thrush I watch'd feeding its young,	  This common marvel I beheld--the parent thrush I watch'd feeding its young,	  This common marvel I beheld--the parent thrush I watch'd feeding its young,
  The singing thrush whose tones of joy and faith ecstatic,	  The singing thrush whose tones of joy and faith ecstatic,	  The singing thrush whose tones of joy and faith ecstatic,	  The singing thrush whose tones of joy and faith ecstatic,
  Fail not to certify and cheer my soul.	  Fail not to certify and cheer my soul.	  Fail not to certify and cheer my soul.	  Fail not to certify and cheer my soul.
			
  There ponder'd, felt I,	  There ponder'd, felt I,	  There ponder'd, felt I,	  There ponder'd, felt I,
  If worms, snakes, loathsome grubs, may to sweet spiritual songs be turn'd,	  If worms, snakes, loathsome grubs, may to sweet spiritual songs be turn'd,	  If worms, snakes, loathsome grubs, may to sweet spiritual songs be turn'd,	  If worms, snakes, loathsome grubs, may to sweet spiritual songs be turn'd,
  If vermin so transposed, so used and bless'd may be,	  If vermin so transposed, so used and bless'd may be,	  If vermin so transposed, so used and bless'd may be,	  If vermin so transposed, so used and bless'd may be,
  Then may I trust in you, your fortunes, days, my country;	  Then may I trust in you, your fortunes, days, my country;	  Then may I trust in you, your fortunes, days, my country;	  Then may I trust in you, your fortunes, days, my country;
  Who knows but these may be the lessons fit for you?	  Who knows but these may be the lessons fit for you?	  Who knows but these may be the lessons fit for you?	  Who knows but these may be the lessons fit for you?
  From these your future song may rise with joyous trills,	  From these your future song may rise with joyous trills,	  From these your future song may rise with joyous trills,	  From these your future song may rise with joyous trills,
  Destin'd to fill the world.	  Destin'd to fill the world.	  Destin'd to fill the world.	  Destin'd to fill the world.
			
			
			
			
Italian Music in Dakota	Italian Music in Dakota	Italian Music in Dakota	Italian Music in Dakota
  ["The Seventeenth--the finest Regimental Band I ever heard."]	  ["The Seventeenth--the finest Regimental Band I ever heard."]	  ["The Seventeenth--the finest Regimental Band I ever heard."]	  ["The Seventeenth--the finest Regimental Band I ever heard."]
			
  Through the soft evening air enwinding all,	  Through the soft evening air enwinding all,	  Through the soft evening air enwinding all,	  Through the soft evening air enwinding all,
  Rocks, woods, fort, cannon, pacing sentries, endless wilds,	  Rocks, woods, fort, cannon, pacing sentries, endless wilds,	  Rocks, woods, fort, cannon, pacing sentries, endless wilds,	  Rocks, woods, fort, cannon, pacing sentries, endless wilds,
  In dulcet streams, in flutes' and cornets' notes,	  In dulcet streams, in flutes' and cornets' notes,	  In dulcet streams, in flutes' and cornets' notes,	  In dulcet streams, in flutes' and cornets' notes,
  Electric, pensive, turbulent, artificial,	  Electric, pensive, turbulent, artificial,	  Electric, pensive, turbulent, artificial,	  Electric, pensive, turbulent, artificial,
  (Yet strangely fitting even here, meanings unknown before,	  (Yet strangely fitting even here, meanings unknown before,	  (Yet strangely fitting even here, meanings unknown before,	  (Yet strangely fitting even here, meanings unknown before,
  Subtler than ever, more harmony, as if born here, related here,	  Subtler than ever, more harmony, as if born here, related here,	  Subtler than ever, more harmony, as if born here, related here,	  Subtler than ever, more harmony, as if born here, related here,
  Not to the city's fresco'd rooms, not to the audience of the opera house,	  Not to the city's fresco'd rooms, not to the audience of the opera house,	  Not to the city's fresco'd rooms, not to the audience of the opera house,	  Not to the city's fresco'd rooms, not to the audience of the opera house,
  Sounds, echoes, wandering strains, as really here at home,	  Sounds, echoes, wandering strains, as really here at home,	  Sounds, echoes, wandering strains, as really here at home,	  Sounds, echoes, wandering strains, as really here at home,
  Sonnambula's innocent love, trios with Norma's anguish,	  Sonnambula's innocent love, trios with Norma's anguish,	  Sonnambula's innocent love, trios with Norma's anguish,	  Sonnambula's innocent love, trios with Norma's anguish,
  And thy ecstatic chorus Poliuto;)	  And thy ecstatic chorus Poliuto;)	  And thy ecstatic chorus Poliuto;)	  And thy ecstatic chorus Poliuto;)
  Ray'd in the limpid yellow slanting sundown,	  Ray'd in the limpid yellow slanting sundown,	  Ray'd in the limpid yellow slanting sundown,	  Ray'd in the limpid yellow slanting sundown,
  Music, Italian music in Dakota.	  Music, Italian music in Dakota.	  Music, Italian music in Dakota.	  Music, Italian music in Dakota.
			
  While Nature, sovereign of this gnarl'd realm,	  While Nature, sovereign of this gnarl'd realm,	  While Nature, sovereign of this gnarl'd realm,	  While Nature, sovereign of this gnarl'd realm,
  Lurking in hidden barbaric grim recesses,	  Lurking in hidden barbaric grim recesses,	  Lurking in hidden barbaric grim recesses,	  Lurking in hidden barbaric grim recesses,
  Acknowledging rapport however far remov'd,	  Acknowledging rapport however far remov'd,	  Acknowledging rapport however far remov'd,	  Acknowledging rapport however far remov'd,
  (As some old root or soil of earth its last-born flower or fruit,)	  (As some old root or soil of earth its last-born flower or fruit,)	  (As some old root or soil of earth its last-born flower or fruit,)	  (As some old root or soil of earth its last-born flower or fruit,)
  Listens well pleas'd.	  Listens well pleas'd.	  Listens well pleas'd.	  Listens well pleas'd.
			
			
			
			
With All Thy Gifts	With All Thy Gifts	With All Thy Gifts	With All Thy Gifts
			
  With all thy gifts America,	  With all thy gifts America,	  With all thy gifts America,	  With all thy gifts America,
  Standing secure, rapidly tending, overlooking the world,	  Standing secure, rapidly tending, overlooking the world,	  Standing secure, rapidly tending, overlooking the world,	  Standing secure, rapidly tending, overlooking the world,
  Power, wealth, extent, vouchsafed to thee--with these and like of	  Power, wealth, extent, vouchsafed to thee--with these and like of	  Power, wealth, extent, vouchsafed to thee--with these and like of	  Power, wealth, extent, vouchsafed to thee--with these and like of
      these vouchsafed to thee,	      these vouchsafed to thee,	      these vouchsafed to thee,	      these vouchsafed to thee,
  What if one gift thou lackest? (the ultimate human problem never solving,)	  What if one gift thou lackest? (the ultimate human problem never solving,)	  What if one gift thou lackest? (the ultimate human problem never solving,)	  What if one gift thou lackest? (the ultimate human problem never solving,)
  The gift of perfect women fit for thee--what if that gift of gifts	  The gift of perfect women fit for thee--what if that gift of gifts	  The gift of perfect women fit for thee--what if that gift of gifts	  The gift of perfect women fit for thee--what if that gift of gifts
      thou lackest?	      thou lackest?	      thou lackest?	      thou lackest?
  The towering feminine of thee? the beauty, health, completion, fit for thee?	  The towering feminine of thee? the beauty, health, completion, fit for thee?	  The towering feminine of thee? the beauty, health, completion, fit for thee?	  The towering feminine of thee? the beauty, health, completion, fit for thee?
  The mothers fit for thee?	  The mothers fit for thee?	  The mothers fit for thee?	  The mothers fit for thee?
			
			
			
			
My Picture-Gallery	My Picture-Gallery	My Picture-Gallery	My Picture-Gallery
			
  In a little house keep I pictures suspended, it is not a fix'd house,	  In a little house keep I pictures suspended, it is not a fix'd house,	  In a little house keep I pictures suspended, it is not a fix'd house,	  In a little house keep I pictures suspended, it is not a fix'd house,
  It is round, it is only a few inches from one side to the other;	  It is round, it is only a few inches from one side to the other;	  It is round, it is only a few inches from one side to the other;	  It is round, it is only a few inches from one side to the other;
  Yet behold, it has room for all the shows of the world, all memories!	  Yet behold, it has room for all the shows of the world, all memories!	  Yet behold, it has room for all the shows of the world, all memories!	  Yet behold, it has room for all the shows of the world, all memories!
  Here the tableaus of life, and here the groupings of death;	  Here the tableaus of life, and here the groupings of death;	  Here the tableaus of life, and here the groupings of death;	  Here the tableaus of life, and here the groupings of death;
  Here, do you know this? this is cicerone himself,	  Here, do you know this? this is cicerone himself,	  Here, do you know this? this is cicerone himself,	  Here, do you know this? this is cicerone himself,
  With finger rais'd he points to the prodigal pictures.	  With finger rais'd he points to the prodigal pictures.	  With finger rais'd he points to the prodigal pictures.	  With finger rais'd he points to the prodigal pictures.
			
			
			
			
The Prairie States	The Prairie States	The Prairie States	The Prairie States
			
  A newer garden of creation, no primal solitude,	  A newer garden of creation, no primal solitude,	  A newer garden of creation, no primal solitude,	  A newer garden of creation, no primal solitude,
  Dense, joyous, modern, populous millions, cities and farms,	  Dense, joyous, modern, populous millions, cities and farms,	  Dense, joyous, modern, populous millions, cities and farms,	  Dense, joyous, modern, populous millions, cities and farms,
  With iron interlaced, composite, tied, many in one,	  With iron interlaced, composite, tied, many in one,	  With iron interlaced, composite, tied, many in one,	  With iron interlaced, composite, tied, many in one,
  By all the world contributed--freedom's and law's and thrift's society,	  By all the world contributed--freedom's and law's and thrift's society,	  By all the world contributed--freedom's and law's and thrift's society,	  By all the world contributed--freedom's and law's and thrift's society,
  The crown and teeming paradise, so far, of time's accumulations,	  The crown and teeming paradise, so far, of time's accumulations,	  The crown and teeming paradise, so far, of time's accumulations,	  The crown and teeming paradise, so far, of time's accumulations,
  To justify the past.	  To justify the past.	  To justify the past.	  To justify the past.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXV	BOOK XXV	BOOK XXV	BOOK XXV
			
			
Proud Music of the Storm	Proud Music of the Storm	Proud Music of the Storm	Proud Music of the Storm
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Proud music of the storm,	  Proud music of the storm,	  Proud music of the storm,	  Proud music of the storm,
  Blast that careers so free, whistling across the prairies,	  Blast that careers so free, whistling across the prairies,	  Blast that careers so free, whistling across the prairies,	  Blast that careers so free, whistling across the prairies,
  Strong hum of forest tree-tops--wind of the mountains,	  Strong hum of forest tree-tops--wind of the mountains,	  Strong hum of forest tree-tops--wind of the mountains,	  Strong hum of forest tree-tops--wind of the mountains,
  Personified dim shapes--you hidden orchestras,	  Personified dim shapes--you hidden orchestras,	  Personified dim shapes--you hidden orchestras,	  Personified dim shapes--you hidden orchestras,
  You serenades of phantoms with instruments alert,	  You serenades of phantoms with instruments alert,	  You serenades of phantoms with instruments alert,	  You serenades of phantoms with instruments alert,
  Blending with Nature's rhythmus all the tongues of nations;	  Blending with Nature's rhythmus all the tongues of nations;	  Blending with Nature's rhythmus all the tongues of nations;	  Blending with Nature's rhythmus all the tongues of nations;
  You chords left as by vast composers--you choruses,	  You chords left as by vast composers--you choruses,	  You chords left as by vast composers--you choruses,	  You chords left as by vast composers--you choruses,
  You formless, free, religious dances--you from the Orient,	  You formless, free, religious dances--you from the Orient,	  You formless, free, religious dances--you from the Orient,	  You formless, free, religious dances--you from the Orient,
  You undertone of rivers, roar of pouring cataracts,	  You undertone of rivers, roar of pouring cataracts,	  You undertone of rivers, roar of pouring cataracts,	  You undertone of rivers, roar of pouring cataracts,
  You sounds from distant guns with galloping cavalry,	  You sounds from distant guns with galloping cavalry,	  You sounds from distant guns with galloping cavalry,	  You sounds from distant guns with galloping cavalry,
  Echoes of camps with all the different bugle-calls,	  Echoes of camps with all the different bugle-calls,	  Echoes of camps with all the different bugle-calls,	  Echoes of camps with all the different bugle-calls,
  Trooping tumultuous, filling the midnight late, bending me powerless,	  Trooping tumultuous, filling the midnight late, bending me powerless,	  Trooping tumultuous, filling the midnight late, bending me powerless,	  Trooping tumultuous, filling the midnight late, bending me powerless,
  Entering my lonesome slumber-chamber, why have you seiz'd me?	  Entering my lonesome slumber-chamber, why have you seiz'd me?	  Entering my lonesome slumber-chamber, why have you seiz'd me?	  Entering my lonesome slumber-chamber, why have you seiz'd me?
			
			
      2	      2	      2	      2
  Come forward O my soul, and let the rest retire,	  Come forward O my soul, and let the rest retire,	  Come forward O my soul, and let the rest retire,	  Come forward O my soul, and let the rest retire,
  Listen, lose not, it is toward thee they tend,	  Listen, lose not, it is toward thee they tend,	  Listen, lose not, it is toward thee they tend,	  Listen, lose not, it is toward thee they tend,
  Parting the midnight, entering my slumber-chamber,	  Parting the midnight, entering my slumber-chamber,	  Parting the midnight, entering my slumber-chamber,	  Parting the midnight, entering my slumber-chamber,
  For thee they sing and dance O soul.	  For thee they sing and dance O soul.	  For thee they sing and dance O soul.	  For thee they sing and dance O soul.
			
  A festival song,	  A festival song,	  A festival song,	  A festival song,
  The duet of the bridegroom and the bride, a marriage-march,	  The duet of the bridegroom and the bride, a marriage-march,	  The duet of the bridegroom and the bride, a marriage-march,	  The duet of the bridegroom and the bride, a marriage-march,
  With lips of love, and hearts of lovers fill'd to the brim with love,	  With lips of love, and hearts of lovers fill'd to the brim with love,	  With lips of love, and hearts of lovers fill'd to the brim with love,	  With lips of love, and hearts of lovers fill'd to the brim with love,
  The red-flush'd cheeks and perfumes, the cortege swarming full of	  The red-flush'd cheeks and perfumes, the cortege swarming full of	  The red-flush'd cheeks and perfumes, the cortege swarming full of	  The red-flush'd cheeks and perfumes, the cortege swarming full of
      friendly faces young and old,	      friendly faces young and old,	      friendly faces young and old,	      friendly faces young and old,
  To flutes' clear notes and sounding harps' cantabile.	  To flutes' clear notes and sounding harps' cantabile.	  To flutes' clear notes and sounding harps' cantabile.	  To flutes' clear notes and sounding harps' cantabile.
			
  Now loud approaching drums,	  Now loud approaching drums,	  Now loud approaching drums,	  Now loud approaching drums,
  Victoria! seest thou in powder-smoke the banners torn but flying?	  Victoria! seest thou in powder-smoke the banners torn but flying?	  Victoria! seest thou in powder-smoke the banners torn but flying?	  Victoria! seest thou in powder-smoke the banners torn but flying?
      the rout of the baffled?	      the rout of the baffled?	      the rout of the baffled?	      the rout of the baffled?
  Hearest those shouts of a conquering army?	  Hearest those shouts of a conquering army?	  Hearest those shouts of a conquering army?	  Hearest those shouts of a conquering army?
			
  (Ah soul, the sobs of women, the wounded groaning in agony,	  (Ah soul, the sobs of women, the wounded groaning in agony,	  (Ah soul, the sobs of women, the wounded groaning in agony,	  (Ah soul, the sobs of women, the wounded groaning in agony,
  The hiss and crackle of flames, the blacken'd ruins, the embers of cities,	  The hiss and crackle of flames, the blacken'd ruins, the embers of cities,	  The hiss and crackle of flames, the blacken'd ruins, the embers of cities,	  The hiss and crackle of flames, the blacken'd ruins, the embers of cities,
  The dirge and desolation of mankind.)	  The dirge and desolation of mankind.)	  The dirge and desolation of mankind.)	  The dirge and desolation of mankind.)
			
  Now airs antique and mediaeval fill me,	  Now airs antique and mediaeval fill me,	  Now airs antique and mediaeval fill me,	  Now airs antique and mediaeval fill me,
  I see and hear old harpers with their harps at Welsh festivals,	  I see and hear old harpers with their harps at Welsh festivals,	  I see and hear old harpers with their harps at Welsh festivals,	  I see and hear old harpers with their harps at Welsh festivals,
  I hear the minnesingers singing their lays of love,	  I hear the minnesingers singing their lays of love,	  I hear the minnesingers singing their lays of love,	  I hear the minnesingers singing their lays of love,
  I hear the minstrels, gleemen, troubadours, of the middle ages.	  I hear the minstrels, gleemen, troubadours, of the middle ages.	  I hear the minstrels, gleemen, troubadours, of the middle ages.	  I hear the minstrels, gleemen, troubadours, of the middle ages.
			
  Now the great organ sounds,	  Now the great organ sounds,	  Now the great organ sounds,	  Now the great organ sounds,
  Tremulous, while underneath, (as the hid footholds of the earth,	  Tremulous, while underneath, (as the hid footholds of the earth,	  Tremulous, while underneath, (as the hid footholds of the earth,	  Tremulous, while underneath, (as the hid footholds of the earth,
  On which arising rest, and leaping forth depend,	  On which arising rest, and leaping forth depend,	  On which arising rest, and leaping forth depend,	  On which arising rest, and leaping forth depend,
  All shapes of beauty, grace and strength, all hues we know,	  All shapes of beauty, grace and strength, all hues we know,	  All shapes of beauty, grace and strength, all hues we know,	  All shapes of beauty, grace and strength, all hues we know,
  Green blades of grass and warbling birds, children that gambol and	  Green blades of grass and warbling birds, children that gambol and	  Green blades of grass and warbling birds, children that gambol and	  Green blades of grass and warbling birds, children that gambol and
      play, the clouds of heaven above,)	      play, the clouds of heaven above,)	      play, the clouds of heaven above,)	      play, the clouds of heaven above,)
  The strong base stands, and its pulsations intermits not,	  The strong base stands, and its pulsations intermits not,	  The strong base stands, and its pulsations intermits not,	  The strong base stands, and its pulsations intermits not,
  Bathing, supporting, merging all the rest, maternity of all the rest,	  Bathing, supporting, merging all the rest, maternity of all the rest,	  Bathing, supporting, merging all the rest, maternity of all the rest,	  Bathing, supporting, merging all the rest, maternity of all the rest,
  And with it every instrument in multitudes,	  And with it every instrument in multitudes,	  And with it every instrument in multitudes,	  And with it every instrument in multitudes,
  The players playing, all the world's musicians,	  The players playing, all the world's musicians,	  The players playing, all the world's musicians,	  The players playing, all the world's musicians,
  The solemn hymns and masses rousing adoration,	  The solemn hymns and masses rousing adoration,	  The solemn hymns and masses rousing adoration,	  The solemn hymns and masses rousing adoration,
  All passionate heart-chants, sorrowful appeals,	  All passionate heart-chants, sorrowful appeals,	  All passionate heart-chants, sorrowful appeals,	  All passionate heart-chants, sorrowful appeals,
  The measureless sweet vocalists of ages,	  The measureless sweet vocalists of ages,	  The measureless sweet vocalists of ages,	  The measureless sweet vocalists of ages,
  And for their solvent setting earth's own diapason,	  And for their solvent setting earth's own diapason,	  And for their solvent setting earth's own diapason,	  And for their solvent setting earth's own diapason,
  Of winds and woods and mighty ocean waves,	  Of winds and woods and mighty ocean waves,	  Of winds and woods and mighty ocean waves,	  Of winds and woods and mighty ocean waves,
  A new composite orchestra, binder of years and climes, ten-fold renewer,	  A new composite orchestra, binder of years and climes, ten-fold renewer,	  A new composite orchestra, binder of years and climes, ten-fold renewer,	  A new composite orchestra, binder of years and climes, ten-fold renewer,
  As of the far-back days the poets tell, the Paradiso,	  As of the far-back days the poets tell, the Paradiso,	  As of the far-back days the poets tell, the Paradiso,	  As of the far-back days the poets tell, the Paradiso,
  The straying thence, the separation long, but now the wandering done,	  The straying thence, the separation long, but now the wandering done,	  The straying thence, the separation long, but now the wandering done,	  The straying thence, the separation long, but now the wandering done,
  The journey done, the journeyman come home,	  The journey done, the journeyman come home,	  The journey done, the journeyman come home,	  The journey done, the journeyman come home,
  And man and art with Nature fused again.	  And man and art with Nature fused again.	  And man and art with Nature fused again.	  And man and art with Nature fused again.
			
  Tutti! for earth and heaven;	  Tutti! for earth and heaven;	  Tutti! for earth and heaven;	  Tutti! for earth and heaven;
  (The Almighty leader now for once has signal'd with his wand.)	  (The Almighty leader now for once has signal'd with his wand.)	  (The Almighty leader now for once has signal'd with his wand.)	  (The Almighty leader now for once has signal'd with his wand.)
			
  The manly strophe of the husbands of the world,	  The manly strophe of the husbands of the world,	  The manly strophe of the husbands of the world,	  The manly strophe of the husbands of the world,
  And all the wives responding.	  And all the wives responding.	  And all the wives responding.	  And all the wives responding.
			
  The tongues of violins,	  The tongues of violins,	  The tongues of violins,	  The tongues of violins,
  (I think O tongues ye tell this heart, that cannot tell itself,	  (I think O tongues ye tell this heart, that cannot tell itself,	  (I think O tongues ye tell this heart, that cannot tell itself,	  (I think O tongues ye tell this heart, that cannot tell itself,
  This brooding yearning heart, that cannot tell itself.)	  This brooding yearning heart, that cannot tell itself.)	  This brooding yearning heart, that cannot tell itself.)	  This brooding yearning heart, that cannot tell itself.)
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Ah from a little child,	  Ah from a little child,	  Ah from a little child,	  Ah from a little child,
  Thou knowest soul how to me all sounds became music,	  Thou knowest soul how to me all sounds became music,	  Thou knowest soul how to me all sounds became music,	  Thou knowest soul how to me all sounds became music,
  My mother's voice in lullaby or hymn,	  My mother's voice in lullaby or hymn,	  My mother's voice in lullaby or hymn,	  My mother's voice in lullaby or hymn,
  (The voice, O tender voices, memory's loving voices,	  (The voice, O tender voices, memory's loving voices,	  (The voice, O tender voices, memory's loving voices,	  (The voice, O tender voices, memory's loving voices,
  Last miracle of all, O dearest mother's, sister's, voices;)	  Last miracle of all, O dearest mother's, sister's, voices;)	  Last miracle of all, O dearest mother's, sister's, voices;)	  Last miracle of all, O dearest mother's, sister's, voices;)
  The rain, the growing corn, the breeze among the long-leav'd corn,	  The rain, the growing corn, the breeze among the long-leav'd corn,	  The rain, the growing corn, the breeze among the long-leav'd corn,	  The rain, the growing corn, the breeze among the long-leav'd corn,
  The measur'd sea-surf beating on the sand,	  The measur'd sea-surf beating on the sand,	  The measur'd sea-surf beating on the sand,	  The measur'd sea-surf beating on the sand,
  The twittering bird, the hawk's sharp scream,	  The twittering bird, the hawk's sharp scream,	  The twittering bird, the hawk's sharp scream,	  The twittering bird, the hawk's sharp scream,
  The wild-fowl's notes at night as flying low migrating north or south,	  The wild-fowl's notes at night as flying low migrating north or south,	  The wild-fowl's notes at night as flying low migrating north or south,	  The wild-fowl's notes at night as flying low migrating north or south,
  The psalm in the country church or mid the clustering trees, the	  The psalm in the country church or mid the clustering trees, the	  The psalm in the country church or mid the clustering trees, the	  The psalm in the country church or mid the clustering trees, the
      open air camp-meeting,	      open air camp-meeting,	      open air camp-meeting,	      open air camp-meeting,
  The fiddler in the tavern, the glee, the long-strung sailor-song,	  The fiddler in the tavern, the glee, the long-strung sailor-song,	  The fiddler in the tavern, the glee, the long-strung sailor-song,	  The fiddler in the tavern, the glee, the long-strung sailor-song,
  The lowing cattle, bleating sheep, the crowing cock at dawn.	  The lowing cattle, bleating sheep, the crowing cock at dawn.	  The lowing cattle, bleating sheep, the crowing cock at dawn.	  The lowing cattle, bleating sheep, the crowing cock at dawn.
			
  All songs of current lands come sounding round me,	  All songs of current lands come sounding round me,	  All songs of current lands come sounding round me,	  All songs of current lands come sounding round me,
  The German airs of friendship, wine and love,	  The German airs of friendship, wine and love,	  The German airs of friendship, wine and love,	  The German airs of friendship, wine and love,
  Irish ballads, merry jigs and dances, English warbles,	  Irish ballads, merry jigs and dances, English warbles,	  Irish ballads, merry jigs and dances, English warbles,	  Irish ballads, merry jigs and dances, English warbles,
  Chansons of France, Scotch tunes, and o'er the rest,	  Chansons of France, Scotch tunes, and o'er the rest,	  Chansons of France, Scotch tunes, and o'er the rest,	  Chansons of France, Scotch tunes, and o'er the rest,
  Italia's peerless compositions.	  Italia's peerless compositions.	  Italia's peerless compositions.	  Italia's peerless compositions.
			
  Across the stage with pallor on her face, yet lurid passion,	  Across the stage with pallor on her face, yet lurid passion,	  Across the stage with pallor on her face, yet lurid passion,	  Across the stage with pallor on her face, yet lurid passion,
  Stalks Norma brandishing the dagger in her hand.	  Stalks Norma brandishing the dagger in her hand.	  Stalks Norma brandishing the dagger in her hand.	  Stalks Norma brandishing the dagger in her hand.
			
  I see poor crazed Lucia's eyes' unnatural gleam,	  I see poor crazed Lucia's eyes' unnatural gleam,	  I see poor crazed Lucia's eyes' unnatural gleam,	  I see poor crazed Lucia's eyes' unnatural gleam,
  Her hair down her back falls loose and dishevel'd.	  Her hair down her back falls loose and dishevel'd.	  Her hair down her back falls loose and dishevel'd.	  Her hair down her back falls loose and dishevel'd.
			
  I see where Ernani walking the bridal garden,	  I see where Ernani walking the bridal garden,	  I see where Ernani walking the bridal garden,	  I see where Ernani walking the bridal garden,
  Amid the scent of night-roses, radiant, holding his bride by the hand,	  Amid the scent of night-roses, radiant, holding his bride by the hand,	  Amid the scent of night-roses, radiant, holding his bride by the hand,	  Amid the scent of night-roses, radiant, holding his bride by the hand,
  Hears the infernal call, the death-pledge of the horn.	  Hears the infernal call, the death-pledge of the horn.	  Hears the infernal call, the death-pledge of the horn.	  Hears the infernal call, the death-pledge of the horn.
			
  To crossing swords and gray hairs bared to heaven,	  To crossing swords and gray hairs bared to heaven,	  To crossing swords and gray hairs bared to heaven,	  To crossing swords and gray hairs bared to heaven,
  The clear electric base and baritone of the world,	  The clear electric base and baritone of the world,	  The clear electric base and baritone of the world,	  The clear electric base and baritone of the world,
  The trombone duo, Libertad forever!	  The trombone duo, Libertad forever!	  The trombone duo, Libertad forever!	  The trombone duo, Libertad forever!
  From Spanish chestnut trees' dense shade,	  From Spanish chestnut trees' dense shade,	  From Spanish chestnut trees' dense shade,	  From Spanish chestnut trees' dense shade,
  By old and heavy convent walls a wailing song,	  By old and heavy convent walls a wailing song,	  By old and heavy convent walls a wailing song,	  By old and heavy convent walls a wailing song,
  Song of lost love, the torch of youth and life quench'd in despair,	  Song of lost love, the torch of youth and life quench'd in despair,	  Song of lost love, the torch of youth and life quench'd in despair,	  Song of lost love, the torch of youth and life quench'd in despair,
  Song of the dying swan, Fernando's heart is breaking.	  Song of the dying swan, Fernando's heart is breaking.	  Song of the dying swan, Fernando's heart is breaking.	  Song of the dying swan, Fernando's heart is breaking.
			
  Awaking from her woes at last retriev'd Amina sings,	  Awaking from her woes at last retriev'd Amina sings,	  Awaking from her woes at last retriev'd Amina sings,	  Awaking from her woes at last retriev'd Amina sings,
  Copious as stars and glad as morning light the torrents of her joy.	  Copious as stars and glad as morning light the torrents of her joy.	  Copious as stars and glad as morning light the torrents of her joy.	  Copious as stars and glad as morning light the torrents of her joy.
			
  (The teeming lady comes,	  (The teeming lady comes,	  (The teeming lady comes,	  (The teeming lady comes,
  The lustrious orb, Venus contralto, the blooming mother,	  The lustrious orb, Venus contralto, the blooming mother,	  The lustrious orb, Venus contralto, the blooming mother,	  The lustrious orb, Venus contralto, the blooming mother,
  Sister of loftiest gods, Alboni's self I hear.)	  Sister of loftiest gods, Alboni's self I hear.)	  Sister of loftiest gods, Alboni's self I hear.)	  Sister of loftiest gods, Alboni's self I hear.)
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  I hear those odes, symphonies, operas,	  I hear those odes, symphonies, operas,	  I hear those odes, symphonies, operas,	  I hear those odes, symphonies, operas,
  I hear in the William Tell the music of an arous'd and angry people,	  I hear in the William Tell the music of an arous'd and angry people,	  I hear in the William Tell the music of an arous'd and angry people,	  I hear in the William Tell the music of an arous'd and angry people,
  I hear Meyerbeer's Huguenots, the Prophet, or Robert,	  I hear Meyerbeer's Huguenots, the Prophet, or Robert,	  I hear Meyerbeer's Huguenots, the Prophet, or Robert,	  I hear Meyerbeer's Huguenots, the Prophet, or Robert,
  Gounod's Faust, or Mozart's Don Juan.	  Gounod's Faust, or Mozart's Don Juan.	  Gounod's Faust, or Mozart's Don Juan.	  Gounod's Faust, or Mozart's Don Juan.
			
  I hear the dance-music of all nations,	  I hear the dance-music of all nations,	  I hear the dance-music of all nations,	  I hear the dance-music of all nations,
  The waltz, some delicious measure, lapsing, bathing me in bliss,	  The waltz, some delicious measure, lapsing, bathing me in bliss,	  The waltz, some delicious measure, lapsing, bathing me in bliss,	  The waltz, some delicious measure, lapsing, bathing me in bliss,
  The bolero to tinkling guitars and clattering castanets.	  The bolero to tinkling guitars and clattering castanets.	  The bolero to tinkling guitars and clattering castanets.	  The bolero to tinkling guitars and clattering castanets.
			
  I see religious dances old and new,	  I see religious dances old and new,	  I see religious dances old and new,	  I see religious dances old and new,
  I hear the sound of the Hebrew lyre,	  I hear the sound of the Hebrew lyre,	  I hear the sound of the Hebrew lyre,	  I hear the sound of the Hebrew lyre,
  I see the crusaders marching bearing the cross on high, to the	  I see the crusaders marching bearing the cross on high, to the	  I see the crusaders marching bearing the cross on high, to the	  I see the crusaders marching bearing the cross on high, to the
      martial clang of cymbals,	      martial clang of cymbals,	      martial clang of cymbals,	      martial clang of cymbals,
  I hear dervishes monotonously chanting, interspers'd with frantic	  I hear dervishes monotonously chanting, interspers'd with frantic	  I hear dervishes monotonously chanting, interspers'd with frantic	  I hear dervishes monotonously chanting, interspers'd with frantic
      shouts, as they spin around turning always towards Mecca,	      shouts, as they spin around turning always towards Mecca,	      shouts, as they spin around turning always towards Mecca,	      shouts, as they spin around turning always towards Mecca,
  I see the rapt religious dances of the Persians and the Arabs,	  I see the rapt religious dances of the Persians and the Arabs,	  I see the rapt religious dances of the Persians and the Arabs,	  I see the rapt religious dances of the Persians and the Arabs,
  Again, at Eleusis, home of Ceres, I see the modern Greeks dancing,	  Again, at Eleusis, home of Ceres, I see the modern Greeks dancing,	  Again, at Eleusis, home of Ceres, I see the modern Greeks dancing,	  Again, at Eleusis, home of Ceres, I see the modern Greeks dancing,
  I hear them clapping their hands as they bend their bodies,	  I hear them clapping their hands as they bend their bodies,	  I hear them clapping their hands as they bend their bodies,	  I hear them clapping their hands as they bend their bodies,
  I hear the metrical shuffling of their feet.	  I hear the metrical shuffling of their feet.	  I hear the metrical shuffling of their feet.	  I hear the metrical shuffling of their feet.
			
  I see again the wild old Corybantian dance, the performers wounding	  I see again the wild old Corybantian dance, the performers wounding	  I see again the wild old Corybantian dance, the performers wounding	  I see again the wild old Corybantian dance, the performers wounding
      each other,	      each other,	      each other,	      each other,
  I see the Roman youth to the shrill sound of flageolets throwing and	  I see the Roman youth to the shrill sound of flageolets throwing and	  I see the Roman youth to the shrill sound of flageolets throwing and	  I see the Roman youth to the shrill sound of flageolets throwing and
      catching their weapons,	      catching their weapons,	      catching their weapons,	      catching their weapons,
  As they fall on their knees and rise again.	  As they fall on their knees and rise again.	  As they fall on their knees and rise again.	  As they fall on their knees and rise again.
			
  I hear from the Mussulman mosque the muezzin calling,	  I hear from the Mussulman mosque the muezzin calling,	  I hear from the Mussulman mosque the muezzin calling,	  I hear from the Mussulman mosque the muezzin calling,
  I see the worshippers within, nor form nor sermon, argument nor word,	  I see the worshippers within, nor form nor sermon, argument nor word,	  I see the worshippers within, nor form nor sermon, argument nor word,	  I see the worshippers within, nor form nor sermon, argument nor word,
  But silent, strange, devout, rais'd, glowing heads, ecstatic faces.	  But silent, strange, devout, rais'd, glowing heads, ecstatic faces.	  But silent, strange, devout, rais'd, glowing heads, ecstatic faces.	  But silent, strange, devout, rais'd, glowing heads, ecstatic faces.
			
  I hear the Egyptian harp of many strings,	  I hear the Egyptian harp of many strings,	  I hear the Egyptian harp of many strings,	  I hear the Egyptian harp of many strings,
  The primitive chants of the Nile boatmen,	  The primitive chants of the Nile boatmen,	  The primitive chants of the Nile boatmen,	  The primitive chants of the Nile boatmen,
  The sacred imperial hymns of China,	  The sacred imperial hymns of China,	  The sacred imperial hymns of China,	  The sacred imperial hymns of China,
  To the delicate sounds of the king, (the stricken wood and stone,)	  To the delicate sounds of the king, (the stricken wood and stone,)	  To the delicate sounds of the king, (the stricken wood and stone,)	  To the delicate sounds of the king, (the stricken wood and stone,)
  Or to Hindu flutes and the fretting twang of the vina,	  Or to Hindu flutes and the fretting twang of the vina,	  Or to Hindu flutes and the fretting twang of the vina,	  Or to Hindu flutes and the fretting twang of the vina,
  A band of bayaderes.	  A band of bayaderes.	  A band of bayaderes.	  A band of bayaderes.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Now Asia, Africa leave me, Europe seizing inflates me,	  Now Asia, Africa leave me, Europe seizing inflates me,	  Now Asia, Africa leave me, Europe seizing inflates me,	  Now Asia, Africa leave me, Europe seizing inflates me,
  To organs huge and bands I hear as from vast concourses of voices,	  To organs huge and bands I hear as from vast concourses of voices,	  To organs huge and bands I hear as from vast concourses of voices,	  To organs huge and bands I hear as from vast concourses of voices,
  Luther's strong hymn Eine feste Burg ist unser Gott,	  Luther's strong hymn Eine feste Burg ist unser Gott,	  Luther's strong hymn Eine feste Burg ist unser Gott,	  Luther's strong hymn Eine feste Burg ist unser Gott,
  Rossini's Stabat Mater dolorosa,	  Rossini's Stabat Mater dolorosa,	  Rossini's Stabat Mater dolorosa,	  Rossini's Stabat Mater dolorosa,
  Or floating in some high cathedral dim with gorgeous color'd windows,	  Or floating in some high cathedral dim with gorgeous color'd windows,	  Or floating in some high cathedral dim with gorgeous color'd windows,	  Or floating in some high cathedral dim with gorgeous color'd windows,
  The passionate Agnus Dei or Gloria in Excelsis.	  The passionate Agnus Dei or Gloria in Excelsis.	  The passionate Agnus Dei or Gloria in Excelsis.	  The passionate Agnus Dei or Gloria in Excelsis.
			
  Composers! mighty maestros!	  Composers! mighty maestros!	  Composers! mighty maestros!	  Composers! mighty maestros!
  And you, sweet singers of old lands, soprani, tenori, bassi!	  And you, sweet singers of old lands, soprani, tenori, bassi!	  And you, sweet singers of old lands, soprani, tenori, bassi!	  And you, sweet singers of old lands, soprani, tenori, bassi!
  To you a new bard caroling in the West,	  To you a new bard caroling in the West,	  To you a new bard caroling in the West,	  To you a new bard caroling in the West,
  Obeisant sends his love.	  Obeisant sends his love.	  Obeisant sends his love.	  Obeisant sends his love.
			
  (Such led to thee O soul,	  (Such led to thee O soul,	  (Such led to thee O soul,	  (Such led to thee O soul,
  All senses, shows and objects, lead to thee,	  All senses, shows and objects, lead to thee,	  All senses, shows and objects, lead to thee,	  All senses, shows and objects, lead to thee,
  But now it seems to me sound leads o'er all the rest.)	  But now it seems to me sound leads o'er all the rest.)	  But now it seems to me sound leads o'er all the rest.)	  But now it seems to me sound leads o'er all the rest.)
			
  I hear the annual singing of the children in St. Paul's cathedral,	  I hear the annual singing of the children in St. Paul's cathedral,	  I hear the annual singing of the children in St. Paul's cathedral,	  I hear the annual singing of the children in St. Paul's cathedral,
  Or, under the high roof of some colossal hall, the symphonies,	  Or, under the high roof of some colossal hall, the symphonies,	  Or, under the high roof of some colossal hall, the symphonies,	  Or, under the high roof of some colossal hall, the symphonies,
      oratorios of Beethoven, Handel, or Haydn,	      oratorios of Beethoven, Handel, or Haydn,	      oratorios of Beethoven, Handel, or Haydn,	      oratorios of Beethoven, Handel, or Haydn,
  The Creation in billows of godhood laves me.	  The Creation in billows of godhood laves me.	  The Creation in billows of godhood laves me.	  The Creation in billows of godhood laves me.
			
  Give me to hold all sounds, (I madly struggling cry,)	  Give me to hold all sounds, (I madly struggling cry,)	  Give me to hold all sounds, (I madly struggling cry,)	  Give me to hold all sounds, (I madly struggling cry,)
  Fill me with all the voices of the universe,	  Fill me with all the voices of the universe,	  Fill me with all the voices of the universe,	  Fill me with all the voices of the universe,
  Endow me with their throbbings, Nature's also,	  Endow me with their throbbings, Nature's also,	  Endow me with their throbbings, Nature's also,	  Endow me with their throbbings, Nature's also,
  The tempests, waters, winds, operas and chants, marches and dances,	  The tempests, waters, winds, operas and chants, marches and dances,	  The tempests, waters, winds, operas and chants, marches and dances,	  The tempests, waters, winds, operas and chants, marches and dances,
  Utter, pour in, for I would take them all!	  Utter, pour in, for I would take them all!	  Utter, pour in, for I would take them all!	  Utter, pour in, for I would take them all!
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Then I woke softly,	  Then I woke softly,	  Then I woke softly,	  Then I woke softly,
  And pausing, questioning awhile the music of my dream,	  And pausing, questioning awhile the music of my dream,	  And pausing, questioning awhile the music of my dream,	  And pausing, questioning awhile the music of my dream,
  And questioning all those reminiscences, the tempest in its fury,	  And questioning all those reminiscences, the tempest in its fury,	  And questioning all those reminiscences, the tempest in its fury,	  And questioning all those reminiscences, the tempest in its fury,
  And all the songs of sopranos and tenors,	  And all the songs of sopranos and tenors,	  And all the songs of sopranos and tenors,	  And all the songs of sopranos and tenors,
  And those rapt oriental dances of religious fervor,	  And those rapt oriental dances of religious fervor,	  And those rapt oriental dances of religious fervor,	  And those rapt oriental dances of religious fervor,
  And the sweet varied instruments, and the diapason of organs,	  And the sweet varied instruments, and the diapason of organs,	  And the sweet varied instruments, and the diapason of organs,	  And the sweet varied instruments, and the diapason of organs,
  And all the artless plaints of love and grief and death,	  And all the artless plaints of love and grief and death,	  And all the artless plaints of love and grief and death,	  And all the artless plaints of love and grief and death,
  I said to my silent curious soul out of the bed of the slumber-chamber,	  I said to my silent curious soul out of the bed of the slumber-chamber,	  I said to my silent curious soul out of the bed of the slumber-chamber,	  I said to my silent curious soul out of the bed of the slumber-chamber,
  Come, for I have found the clew I sought so long,	  Come, for I have found the clew I sought so long,	  Come, for I have found the clew I sought so long,	  Come, for I have found the clew I sought so long,
  Let us go forth refresh'd amid the day,	  Let us go forth refresh'd amid the day,	  Let us go forth refresh'd amid the day,	  Let us go forth refresh'd amid the day,
  Cheerfully tallying life, walking the world, the real,	  Cheerfully tallying life, walking the world, the real,	  Cheerfully tallying life, walking the world, the real,	  Cheerfully tallying life, walking the world, the real,
  Nourish'd henceforth by our celestial dream.	  Nourish'd henceforth by our celestial dream.	  Nourish'd henceforth by our celestial dream.	  Nourish'd henceforth by our celestial dream.
			
  And I said, moreover,	  And I said, moreover,	  And I said, moreover,	  And I said, moreover,
  Haply what thou hast heard O soul was not the sound of winds,	  Haply what thou hast heard O soul was not the sound of winds,	  Haply what thou hast heard O soul was not the sound of winds,	  Haply what thou hast heard O soul was not the sound of winds,
  Nor dream of raging storm, nor sea-hawk's flapping wings nor harsh scream,	  Nor dream of raging storm, nor sea-hawk's flapping wings nor harsh scream,	  Nor dream of raging storm, nor sea-hawk's flapping wings nor harsh scream,	  Nor dream of raging storm, nor sea-hawk's flapping wings nor harsh scream,
  Nor vocalism of sun-bright Italy,	  Nor vocalism of sun-bright Italy,	  Nor vocalism of sun-bright Italy,	  Nor vocalism of sun-bright Italy,
  Nor German organ majestic, nor vast concourse of voices, nor layers	  Nor German organ majestic, nor vast concourse of voices, nor layers	  Nor German organ majestic, nor vast concourse of voices, nor layers	  Nor German organ majestic, nor vast concourse of voices, nor layers
      of harmonies,	      of harmonies,	      of harmonies,	      of harmonies,
  Nor strophes of husbands and wives, nor sound of marching soldiers,	  Nor strophes of husbands and wives, nor sound of marching soldiers,	  Nor strophes of husbands and wives, nor sound of marching soldiers,	  Nor strophes of husbands and wives, nor sound of marching soldiers,
  Nor flutes, nor harps, nor the bugle-calls of camps,	  Nor flutes, nor harps, nor the bugle-calls of camps,	  Nor flutes, nor harps, nor the bugle-calls of camps,	  Nor flutes, nor harps, nor the bugle-calls of camps,
  But to a new rhythmus fitted for thee,	  But to a new rhythmus fitted for thee,	  But to a new rhythmus fitted for thee,	  But to a new rhythmus fitted for thee,
  Poems bridging the way from Life to Death, vaguely wafted in night	  Poems bridging the way from Life to Death, vaguely wafted in night	  Poems bridging the way from Life to Death, vaguely wafted in night	  Poems bridging the way from Life to Death, vaguely wafted in night
      air, uncaught, unwritten,	      air, uncaught, unwritten,	      air, uncaught, unwritten,	      air, uncaught, unwritten,
  Which let us go forth in the bold day and write.	  Which let us go forth in the bold day and write.	  Which let us go forth in the bold day and write.	  Which let us go forth in the bold day and write.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXVI	BOOK XXVI	BOOK XXVI	BOOK XXVI
			
			
Passage to India	Passage to India	Passage to India	Passage to India
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Singing my days,	  Singing my days,	  Singing my days,	  Singing my days,
  Singing the great achievements of the present,	  Singing the great achievements of the present,	  Singing the great achievements of the present,	  Singing the great achievements of the present,
  Singing the strong light works of engineers,	  Singing the strong light works of engineers,	  Singing the strong light works of engineers,	  Singing the strong light works of engineers,
  Our modern wonders, (the antique ponderous Seven outvied,)	  Our modern wonders, (the antique ponderous Seven outvied,)	  Our modern wonders, (the antique ponderous Seven outvied,)	  Our modern wonders, (the antique ponderous Seven outvied,)
  In the Old World the east the Suez canal,	  In the Old World the east the Suez canal,	  In the Old World the east the Suez canal,	  In the Old World the east the Suez canal,
  The New by its mighty railroad spann'd,	  The New by its mighty railroad spann'd,	  The New by its mighty railroad spann'd,	  The New by its mighty railroad spann'd,
  The seas inlaid with eloquent gentle wires;	  The seas inlaid with eloquent gentle wires;	  The seas inlaid with eloquent gentle wires;	  The seas inlaid with eloquent gentle wires;
  Yet first to sound, and ever sound, the cry with thee O soul,	  Yet first to sound, and ever sound, the cry with thee O soul,	  Yet first to sound, and ever sound, the cry with thee O soul,	  Yet first to sound, and ever sound, the cry with thee O soul,
  The Past! the Past! the Past!	  The Past! the Past! the Past!	  The Past! the Past! the Past!	  The Past! the Past! the Past!
			
  The Past--the dark unfathom'd retrospect!	  The Past--the dark unfathom'd retrospect!	  The Past--the dark unfathom'd retrospect!	  The Past--the dark unfathom'd retrospect!
  The teeming gulf--the sleepers and the shadows!	  The teeming gulf--the sleepers and the shadows!	  The teeming gulf--the sleepers and the shadows!	  The teeming gulf--the sleepers and the shadows!
  The past--the infinite greatness of the past!	  The past--the infinite greatness of the past!	  The past--the infinite greatness of the past!	  The past--the infinite greatness of the past!
  For what is the present after all but a growth out of the past?	  For what is the present after all but a growth out of the past?	  For what is the present after all but a growth out of the past?	  For what is the present after all but a growth out of the past?
  (As a projectile form'd, impell'd, passing a certain line, still keeps on,	  (As a projectile form'd, impell'd, passing a certain line, still keeps on,	  (As a projectile form'd, impell'd, passing a certain line, still keeps on,	  (As a projectile form'd, impell'd, passing a certain line, still keeps on,
  So the present, utterly form'd, impell'd by the past.)	  So the present, utterly form'd, impell'd by the past.)	  So the present, utterly form'd, impell'd by the past.)	  So the present, utterly form'd, impell'd by the past.)
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Passage O soul to India!	  Passage O soul to India!	  Passage O soul to India!	  Passage O soul to India!
  Eclaircise the myths Asiatic, the primitive fables.	  Eclaircise the myths Asiatic, the primitive fables.	  Eclaircise the myths Asiatic, the primitive fables.	  Eclaircise the myths Asiatic, the primitive fables.
			
  Not you alone proud truths of the world,	  Not you alone proud truths of the world,	  Not you alone proud truths of the world,	  Not you alone proud truths of the world,
  Nor you alone ye facts of modern science,	  Nor you alone ye facts of modern science,	  Nor you alone ye facts of modern science,	  Nor you alone ye facts of modern science,
  But myths and fables of eld, Asia's, Africa's fables,	  But myths and fables of eld, Asia's, Africa's fables,	  But myths and fables of eld, Asia's, Africa's fables,	  But myths and fables of eld, Asia's, Africa's fables,
  The far-darting beams of the spirit, the unloos'd dreams,	  The far-darting beams of the spirit, the unloos'd dreams,	  The far-darting beams of the spirit, the unloos'd dreams,	  The far-darting beams of the spirit, the unloos'd dreams,
  The deep diving bibles and legends,	  The deep diving bibles and legends,	  The deep diving bibles and legends,	  The deep diving bibles and legends,
  The daring plots of the poets, the elder religions;	  The daring plots of the poets, the elder religions;	  The daring plots of the poets, the elder religions;	  The daring plots of the poets, the elder religions;
  O you temples fairer than lilies pour'd over by the rising sun!	  O you temples fairer than lilies pour'd over by the rising sun!	  O you temples fairer than lilies pour'd over by the rising sun!	  O you temples fairer than lilies pour'd over by the rising sun!
  O you fables spurning the known, eluding the hold of the known,	  O you fables spurning the known, eluding the hold of the known,	  O you fables spurning the known, eluding the hold of the known,	  O you fables spurning the known, eluding the hold of the known,
      mounting to heaven!	      mounting to heaven!	      mounting to heaven!	      mounting to heaven!
  You lofty and dazzling towers, pinnacled, red as roses, burnish'd	  You lofty and dazzling towers, pinnacled, red as roses, burnish'd	  You lofty and dazzling towers, pinnacled, red as roses, burnish'd	  You lofty and dazzling towers, pinnacled, red as roses, burnish'd
      with gold!	      with gold!	      with gold!	      with gold!
  Towers of fables immortal fashion'd from mortal dreams!	  Towers of fables immortal fashion'd from mortal dreams!	  Towers of fables immortal fashion'd from mortal dreams!	  Towers of fables immortal fashion'd from mortal dreams!
  You too I welcome and fully the same as the rest!	  You too I welcome and fully the same as the rest!	  You too I welcome and fully the same as the rest!	  You too I welcome and fully the same as the rest!
  You too with joy I sing.	  You too with joy I sing.	  You too with joy I sing.	  You too with joy I sing.
			
  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!
  Lo, soul, seest thou not God's purpose from the first?	  Lo, soul, seest thou not God's purpose from the first?	  Lo, soul, seest thou not God's purpose from the first?	  Lo, soul, seest thou not God's purpose from the first?
  The earth to be spann'd, connected by network,	  The earth to be spann'd, connected by network,	  The earth to be spann'd, connected by network,	  The earth to be spann'd, connected by network,
  The races, neighbors, to marry and be given in marriage,	  The races, neighbors, to marry and be given in marriage,	  The races, neighbors, to marry and be given in marriage,	  The races, neighbors, to marry and be given in marriage,
  The oceans to be cross'd, the distant brought near,	  The oceans to be cross'd, the distant brought near,	  The oceans to be cross'd, the distant brought near,	  The oceans to be cross'd, the distant brought near,
  The lands to be welded together.	  The lands to be welded together.	  The lands to be welded together.	  The lands to be welded together.
			
  A worship new I sing,	  A worship new I sing,	  A worship new I sing,	  A worship new I sing,
  You captains, voyagers, explorers, yours,	  You captains, voyagers, explorers, yours,	  You captains, voyagers, explorers, yours,	  You captains, voyagers, explorers, yours,
  You engineers, you architects, machinists, yours,	  You engineers, you architects, machinists, yours,	  You engineers, you architects, machinists, yours,	  You engineers, you architects, machinists, yours,
  You, not for trade or transportation only,	  You, not for trade or transportation only,	  You, not for trade or transportation only,	  You, not for trade or transportation only,
  But in God's name, and for thy sake O soul.	  But in God's name, and for thy sake O soul.	  But in God's name, and for thy sake O soul.	  But in God's name, and for thy sake O soul.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!
  Lo soul for thee of tableaus twain,	  Lo soul for thee of tableaus twain,	  Lo soul for thee of tableaus twain,	  Lo soul for thee of tableaus twain,
  I see in one the Suez canal initiated, open'd,	  I see in one the Suez canal initiated, open'd,	  I see in one the Suez canal initiated, open'd,	  I see in one the Suez canal initiated, open'd,
  I see the procession of steamships, the Empress Engenie's leading the van,	  I see the procession of steamships, the Empress Engenie's leading the van,	  I see the procession of steamships, the Empress Engenie's leading the van,	  I see the procession of steamships, the Empress Engenie's leading the van,
  I mark from on deck the strange landscape, the pure sky, the level	  I mark from on deck the strange landscape, the pure sky, the level	  I mark from on deck the strange landscape, the pure sky, the level	  I mark from on deck the strange landscape, the pure sky, the level
      sand in the distance,	      sand in the distance,	      sand in the distance,	      sand in the distance,
  I pass swiftly the picturesque groups, the workmen gather'd,	  I pass swiftly the picturesque groups, the workmen gather'd,	  I pass swiftly the picturesque groups, the workmen gather'd,	  I pass swiftly the picturesque groups, the workmen gather'd,
  The gigantic dredging machines.	  The gigantic dredging machines.	  The gigantic dredging machines.	  The gigantic dredging machines.
			
  In one again, different, (yet thine, all thine, O soul, the same,)	  In one again, different, (yet thine, all thine, O soul, the same,)	  In one again, different, (yet thine, all thine, O soul, the same,)	  In one again, different, (yet thine, all thine, O soul, the same,)
  I see over my own continent the Pacific railroad surmounting every barrier,	  I see over my own continent the Pacific railroad surmounting every barrier,	  I see over my own continent the Pacific railroad surmounting every barrier,	  I see over my own continent the Pacific railroad surmounting every barrier,
  I see continual trains of cars winding along the Platte carrying	  I see continual trains of cars winding along the Platte carrying	  I see continual trains of cars winding along the Platte carrying	  I see continual trains of cars winding along the Platte carrying
      freight and passengers,	      freight and passengers,	      freight and passengers,	      freight and passengers,
  I hear the locomotives rushing and roaring, and the shrill steam-whistle,	  I hear the locomotives rushing and roaring, and the shrill steam-whistle,	  I hear the locomotives rushing and roaring, and the shrill steam-whistle,	  I hear the locomotives rushing and roaring, and the shrill steam-whistle,
  I hear the echoes reverberate through the grandest scenery in the world,	  I hear the echoes reverberate through the grandest scenery in the world,	  I hear the echoes reverberate through the grandest scenery in the world,	  I hear the echoes reverberate through the grandest scenery in the world,
  I cross the Laramie plains, I note the rocks in grotesque shapes,	  I cross the Laramie plains, I note the rocks in grotesque shapes,	  I cross the Laramie plains, I note the rocks in grotesque shapes,	  I cross the Laramie plains, I note the rocks in grotesque shapes,
      the buttes,	      the buttes,	      the buttes,	      the buttes,
  I see the plentiful larkspur and wild onions, the barren, colorless,	  I see the plentiful larkspur and wild onions, the barren, colorless,	  I see the plentiful larkspur and wild onions, the barren, colorless,	  I see the plentiful larkspur and wild onions, the barren, colorless,
      sage-deserts,	      sage-deserts,	      sage-deserts,	      sage-deserts,
  I see in glimpses afar or towering immediately above me the great	  I see in glimpses afar or towering immediately above me the great	  I see in glimpses afar or towering immediately above me the great	  I see in glimpses afar or towering immediately above me the great
      mountains, I see the Wind river and the Wahsatch mountains,	      mountains, I see the Wind river and the Wahsatch mountains,	      mountains, I see the Wind river and the Wahsatch mountains,	      mountains, I see the Wind river and the Wahsatch mountains,
  I see the Monument mountain and the Eagle's Nest, I pass the	  I see the Monument mountain and the Eagle's Nest, I pass the	  I see the Monument mountain and the Eagle's Nest, I pass the	  I see the Monument mountain and the Eagle's Nest, I pass the
      Promontory, I ascend the Nevadas,	      Promontory, I ascend the Nevadas,	      Promontory, I ascend the Nevadas,	      Promontory, I ascend the Nevadas,
  I scan the noble Elk mountain and wind around its base,	  I scan the noble Elk mountain and wind around its base,	  I scan the noble Elk mountain and wind around its base,	  I scan the noble Elk mountain and wind around its base,
  I see the Humboldt range, I thread the valley and cross the river,	  I see the Humboldt range, I thread the valley and cross the river,	  I see the Humboldt range, I thread the valley and cross the river,	  I see the Humboldt range, I thread the valley and cross the river,
  I see the clear waters of lake Tahoe, I see forests of majestic pines,	  I see the clear waters of lake Tahoe, I see forests of majestic pines,	  I see the clear waters of lake Tahoe, I see forests of majestic pines,	  I see the clear waters of lake Tahoe, I see forests of majestic pines,
  Or crossing the great desert, the alkaline plains, I behold	  Or crossing the great desert, the alkaline plains, I behold	  Or crossing the great desert, the alkaline plains, I behold	  Or crossing the great desert, the alkaline plains, I behold
      enchanting mirages of waters and meadows,	      enchanting mirages of waters and meadows,	      enchanting mirages of waters and meadows,	      enchanting mirages of waters and meadows,
  Marking through these and after all, in duplicate slender lines,	  Marking through these and after all, in duplicate slender lines,	  Marking through these and after all, in duplicate slender lines,	  Marking through these and after all, in duplicate slender lines,
  Bridging the three or four thousand miles of land travel,	  Bridging the three or four thousand miles of land travel,	  Bridging the three or four thousand miles of land travel,	  Bridging the three or four thousand miles of land travel,
  Tying the Eastern to the Western sea,	  Tying the Eastern to the Western sea,	  Tying the Eastern to the Western sea,	  Tying the Eastern to the Western sea,
  The road between Europe and Asia.	  The road between Europe and Asia.	  The road between Europe and Asia.	  The road between Europe and Asia.
			
  (Ah Genoese thy dream! thy dream!	  (Ah Genoese thy dream! thy dream!	  (Ah Genoese thy dream! thy dream!	  (Ah Genoese thy dream! thy dream!
  Centuries after thou art laid in thy grave,	  Centuries after thou art laid in thy grave,	  Centuries after thou art laid in thy grave,	  Centuries after thou art laid in thy grave,
  The shore thou foundest verifies thy dream.)	  The shore thou foundest verifies thy dream.)	  The shore thou foundest verifies thy dream.)	  The shore thou foundest verifies thy dream.)
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!
  Struggles of many a captain, tales of many a sailor dead,	  Struggles of many a captain, tales of many a sailor dead,	  Struggles of many a captain, tales of many a sailor dead,	  Struggles of many a captain, tales of many a sailor dead,
  Over my mood stealing and spreading they come,	  Over my mood stealing and spreading they come,	  Over my mood stealing and spreading they come,	  Over my mood stealing and spreading they come,
  Like clouds and cloudlets in the unreach'd sky.	  Like clouds and cloudlets in the unreach'd sky.	  Like clouds and cloudlets in the unreach'd sky.	  Like clouds and cloudlets in the unreach'd sky.
			
  Along all history, down the slopes,	  Along all history, down the slopes,	  Along all history, down the slopes,	  Along all history, down the slopes,
  As a rivulet running, sinking now, and now again to the surface rising,	  As a rivulet running, sinking now, and now again to the surface rising,	  As a rivulet running, sinking now, and now again to the surface rising,	  As a rivulet running, sinking now, and now again to the surface rising,
  A ceaseless thought, a varied train--lo, soul, to thee, thy sight,	  A ceaseless thought, a varied train--lo, soul, to thee, thy sight,	  A ceaseless thought, a varied train--lo, soul, to thee, thy sight,	  A ceaseless thought, a varied train--lo, soul, to thee, thy sight,
      they rise,	      they rise,	      they rise,	      they rise,
  The plans, the voyages again, the expeditions;	  The plans, the voyages again, the expeditions;	  The plans, the voyages again, the expeditions;	  The plans, the voyages again, the expeditions;
  Again Vasco de Gama sails forth,	  Again Vasco de Gama sails forth,	  Again Vasco de Gama sails forth,	  Again Vasco de Gama sails forth,
  Again the knowledge gain'd, the mariner's compass,	  Again the knowledge gain'd, the mariner's compass,	  Again the knowledge gain'd, the mariner's compass,	  Again the knowledge gain'd, the mariner's compass,
  Lands found and nations born, thou born America,	  Lands found and nations born, thou born America,	  Lands found and nations born, thou born America,	  Lands found and nations born, thou born America,
  For purpose vast, man's long probation fill'd,	  For purpose vast, man's long probation fill'd,	  For purpose vast, man's long probation fill'd,	  For purpose vast, man's long probation fill'd,
  Thou rondure of the world at last accomplish'd.	  Thou rondure of the world at last accomplish'd.	  Thou rondure of the world at last accomplish'd.	  Thou rondure of the world at last accomplish'd.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  O vast Rondure, swimming in space,	  O vast Rondure, swimming in space,	  O vast Rondure, swimming in space,	  O vast Rondure, swimming in space,
  Cover'd all over with visible power and beauty,	  Cover'd all over with visible power and beauty,	  Cover'd all over with visible power and beauty,	  Cover'd all over with visible power and beauty,
  Alternate light and day and the teeming spiritual darkness,	  Alternate light and day and the teeming spiritual darkness,	  Alternate light and day and the teeming spiritual darkness,	  Alternate light and day and the teeming spiritual darkness,
  Unspeakable high processions of sun and moon and countless stars above,	  Unspeakable high processions of sun and moon and countless stars above,	  Unspeakable high processions of sun and moon and countless stars above,	  Unspeakable high processions of sun and moon and countless stars above,
  Below, the manifold grass and waters, animals, mountains, trees,	  Below, the manifold grass and waters, animals, mountains, trees,	  Below, the manifold grass and waters, animals, mountains, trees,	  Below, the manifold grass and waters, animals, mountains, trees,
  With inscrutable purpose, some hidden prophetic intention,	  With inscrutable purpose, some hidden prophetic intention,	  With inscrutable purpose, some hidden prophetic intention,	  With inscrutable purpose, some hidden prophetic intention,
  Now first it seems my thought begins to span thee.	  Now first it seems my thought begins to span thee.	  Now first it seems my thought begins to span thee.	  Now first it seems my thought begins to span thee.
			
  Down from the gardens of Asia descending radiating,	  Down from the gardens of Asia descending radiating,	  Down from the gardens of Asia descending radiating,	  Down from the gardens of Asia descending radiating,
  Adam and Eve appear, then their myriad progeny after them,	  Adam and Eve appear, then their myriad progeny after them,	  Adam and Eve appear, then their myriad progeny after them,	  Adam and Eve appear, then their myriad progeny after them,
  Wandering, yearning, curious, with restless explorations,	  Wandering, yearning, curious, with restless explorations,	  Wandering, yearning, curious, with restless explorations,	  Wandering, yearning, curious, with restless explorations,
  With questionings, baffled, formless, feverish, with never-happy hearts,	  With questionings, baffled, formless, feverish, with never-happy hearts,	  With questionings, baffled, formless, feverish, with never-happy hearts,	  With questionings, baffled, formless, feverish, with never-happy hearts,
  With that sad incessant refrain, Wherefore unsatisfied soul? and	  With that sad incessant refrain, Wherefore unsatisfied soul? and	  With that sad incessant refrain, Wherefore unsatisfied soul? and	  With that sad incessant refrain, Wherefore unsatisfied soul? and
      Whither O mocking life?	      Whither O mocking life?	      Whither O mocking life?	      Whither O mocking life?
			
  Ah who shall soothe these feverish children?	  Ah who shall soothe these feverish children?	  Ah who shall soothe these feverish children?	  Ah who shall soothe these feverish children?
  Who Justify these restless explorations?	  Who Justify these restless explorations?	  Who Justify these restless explorations?	  Who Justify these restless explorations?
  Who speak the secret of impassive earth?	  Who speak the secret of impassive earth?	  Who speak the secret of impassive earth?	  Who speak the secret of impassive earth?
  Who bind it to us? what is this separate Nature so unnatural?	  Who bind it to us? what is this separate Nature so unnatural?	  Who bind it to us? what is this separate Nature so unnatural?	  Who bind it to us? what is this separate Nature so unnatural?
  What is this earth to our affections? (unloving earth, without a	  What is this earth to our affections? (unloving earth, without a	  What is this earth to our affections? (unloving earth, without a	  What is this earth to our affections? (unloving earth, without a
      throb to answer ours,	      throb to answer ours,	      throb to answer ours,	      throb to answer ours,
  Cold earth, the place of graves.)	  Cold earth, the place of graves.)	  Cold earth, the place of graves.)	  Cold earth, the place of graves.)
			
  Yet soul be sure the first intent remains, and shall be carried out,	  Yet soul be sure the first intent remains, and shall be carried out,	  Yet soul be sure the first intent remains, and shall be carried out,	  Yet soul be sure the first intent remains, and shall be carried out,
  Perhaps even now the time has arrived.	  Perhaps even now the time has arrived.	  Perhaps even now the time has arrived.	  Perhaps even now the time has arrived.
			
  After the seas are all cross'd, (as they seem already cross'd,)	  After the seas are all cross'd, (as they seem already cross'd,)	  After the seas are all cross'd, (as they seem already cross'd,)	  After the seas are all cross'd, (as they seem already cross'd,)
  After the great captains and engineers have accomplish'd their work,	  After the great captains and engineers have accomplish'd their work,	  After the great captains and engineers have accomplish'd their work,	  After the great captains and engineers have accomplish'd their work,
  After the noble inventors, after the scientists, the chemist, the	  After the noble inventors, after the scientists, the chemist, the	  After the noble inventors, after the scientists, the chemist, the	  After the noble inventors, after the scientists, the chemist, the
      geologist, ethnologist,	      geologist, ethnologist,	      geologist, ethnologist,	      geologist, ethnologist,
  Finally shall come the poet worthy that name,	  Finally shall come the poet worthy that name,	  Finally shall come the poet worthy that name,	  Finally shall come the poet worthy that name,
  The true son of God shall come singing his songs.	  The true son of God shall come singing his songs.	  The true son of God shall come singing his songs.	  The true son of God shall come singing his songs.
			
  Then not your deeds only O voyagers, O scientists and inventors,	  Then not your deeds only O voyagers, O scientists and inventors,	  Then not your deeds only O voyagers, O scientists and inventors,	  Then not your deeds only O voyagers, O scientists and inventors,
      shall be justified,	      shall be justified,	      shall be justified,	      shall be justified,
  All these hearts as of fretted children shall be sooth'd,	  All these hearts as of fretted children shall be sooth'd,	  All these hearts as of fretted children shall be sooth'd,	  All these hearts as of fretted children shall be sooth'd,
  All affection shall be fully responded to, the secret shall be told,	  All affection shall be fully responded to, the secret shall be told,	  All affection shall be fully responded to, the secret shall be told,	  All affection shall be fully responded to, the secret shall be told,
  All these separations and gaps shall be taken up and hook'd and	  All these separations and gaps shall be taken up and hook'd and	  All these separations and gaps shall be taken up and hook'd and	  All these separations and gaps shall be taken up and hook'd and
      link'd together,	      link'd together,	      link'd together,	      link'd together,
  The whole earth, this cold, impassive, voiceless earth, shall be	  The whole earth, this cold, impassive, voiceless earth, shall be	  The whole earth, this cold, impassive, voiceless earth, shall be	  The whole earth, this cold, impassive, voiceless earth, shall be
      completely Justified,	      completely Justified,	      completely Justified,	      completely Justified,
  Trinitas divine shall be gloriously accomplish'd and compacted by	  Trinitas divine shall be gloriously accomplish'd and compacted by	  Trinitas divine shall be gloriously accomplish'd and compacted by	  Trinitas divine shall be gloriously accomplish'd and compacted by
      the true son of God, the poet,	      the true son of God, the poet,	      the true son of God, the poet,	      the true son of God, the poet,
  (He shall indeed pass the straits and conquer the mountains,	  (He shall indeed pass the straits and conquer the mountains,	  (He shall indeed pass the straits and conquer the mountains,	  (He shall indeed pass the straits and conquer the mountains,
  He shall double the cape of Good Hope to some purpose,)	  He shall double the cape of Good Hope to some purpose,)	  He shall double the cape of Good Hope to some purpose,)	  He shall double the cape of Good Hope to some purpose,)
  Nature and Man shall be disjoin'd and diffused no more,	  Nature and Man shall be disjoin'd and diffused no more,	  Nature and Man shall be disjoin'd and diffused no more,	  Nature and Man shall be disjoin'd and diffused no more,
  The true son of God shall absolutely fuse them.	  The true son of God shall absolutely fuse them.	  The true son of God shall absolutely fuse them.	  The true son of God shall absolutely fuse them.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Year at whose wide-flung door I sing!	  Year at whose wide-flung door I sing!	  Year at whose wide-flung door I sing!	  Year at whose wide-flung door I sing!
  Year of the purpose accomplish'd!	  Year of the purpose accomplish'd!	  Year of the purpose accomplish'd!	  Year of the purpose accomplish'd!
  Year of the marriage of continents, climates and oceans!	  Year of the marriage of continents, climates and oceans!	  Year of the marriage of continents, climates and oceans!	  Year of the marriage of continents, climates and oceans!
  (No mere doge of Venice now wedding the Adriatic,)	  (No mere doge of Venice now wedding the Adriatic,)	  (No mere doge of Venice now wedding the Adriatic,)	  (No mere doge of Venice now wedding the Adriatic,)
  I see O year in you the vast terraqueous globe given and giving all,	  I see O year in you the vast terraqueous globe given and giving all,	  I see O year in you the vast terraqueous globe given and giving all,	  I see O year in you the vast terraqueous globe given and giving all,
  Europe to Asia, Africa join'd, and they to the New World,	  Europe to Asia, Africa join'd, and they to the New World,	  Europe to Asia, Africa join'd, and they to the New World,	  Europe to Asia, Africa join'd, and they to the New World,
  The lands, geographies, dancing before you, holding a festival garland,	  The lands, geographies, dancing before you, holding a festival garland,	  The lands, geographies, dancing before you, holding a festival garland,	  The lands, geographies, dancing before you, holding a festival garland,
  As brides and bridegrooms hand in hand.	  As brides and bridegrooms hand in hand.	  As brides and bridegrooms hand in hand.	  As brides and bridegrooms hand in hand.
			
  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!	  Passage to India!
  Cooling airs from Caucasus far, soothing cradle of man,	  Cooling airs from Caucasus far, soothing cradle of man,	  Cooling airs from Caucasus far, soothing cradle of man,	  Cooling airs from Caucasus far, soothing cradle of man,
  The river Euphrates flowing, the past lit up again.	  The river Euphrates flowing, the past lit up again.	  The river Euphrates flowing, the past lit up again.	  The river Euphrates flowing, the past lit up again.
			
  Lo soul, the retrospect brought forward,	  Lo soul, the retrospect brought forward,	  Lo soul, the retrospect brought forward,	  Lo soul, the retrospect brought forward,
  The old, most populous, wealthiest of earth's lands,	  The old, most populous, wealthiest of earth's lands,	  The old, most populous, wealthiest of earth's lands,	  The old, most populous, wealthiest of earth's lands,
  The streams of the Indus and the Ganges and their many affluents,	  The streams of the Indus and the Ganges and their many affluents,	  The streams of the Indus and the Ganges and their many affluents,	  The streams of the Indus and the Ganges and their many affluents,
  (I my shores of America walking to-day behold, resuming all,)	  (I my shores of America walking to-day behold, resuming all,)	  (I my shores of America walking to-day behold, resuming all,)	  (I my shores of America walking to-day behold, resuming all,)
  The tale of Alexander on his warlike marches suddenly dying,	  The tale of Alexander on his warlike marches suddenly dying,	  The tale of Alexander on his warlike marches suddenly dying,	  The tale of Alexander on his warlike marches suddenly dying,
  On one side China and on the other side Persia and Arabia,	  On one side China and on the other side Persia and Arabia,	  On one side China and on the other side Persia and Arabia,	  On one side China and on the other side Persia and Arabia,
  To the south the great seas and the bay of Bengal,	  To the south the great seas and the bay of Bengal,	  To the south the great seas and the bay of Bengal,	  To the south the great seas and the bay of Bengal,
  The flowing literatures, tremendous epics, religions, castes,	  The flowing literatures, tremendous epics, religions, castes,	  The flowing literatures, tremendous epics, religions, castes,	  The flowing literatures, tremendous epics, religions, castes,
  Old occult Brahma interminably far back, the tender and junior Buddha,	  Old occult Brahma interminably far back, the tender and junior Buddha,	  Old occult Brahma interminably far back, the tender and junior Buddha,	  Old occult Brahma interminably far back, the tender and junior Buddha,
  Central and southern empires and all their belongings, possessors,	  Central and southern empires and all their belongings, possessors,	  Central and southern empires and all their belongings, possessors,	  Central and southern empires and all their belongings, possessors,
  The wars of Tamerlane,the reign of Aurungzebe,	  The wars of Tamerlane,the reign of Aurungzebe,	  The wars of Tamerlane,the reign of Aurungzebe,	  The wars of Tamerlane,the reign of Aurungzebe,
  The traders, rulers, explorers, Moslems, Venetians, Byzantium, the	  The traders, rulers, explorers, Moslems, Venetians, Byzantium, the	  The traders, rulers, explorers, Moslems, Venetians, Byzantium, the	  The traders, rulers, explorers, Moslems, Venetians, Byzantium, the
      Arabs, Portuguese,	      Arabs, Portuguese,	      Arabs, Portuguese,	      Arabs, Portuguese,
  The first travelers famous yet, Marco Polo, Batouta the Moor,	  The first travelers famous yet, Marco Polo, Batouta the Moor,	  The first travelers famous yet, Marco Polo, Batouta the Moor,	  The first travelers famous yet, Marco Polo, Batouta the Moor,
  Doubts to be solv'd, the map incognita, blanks to be fill'd,	  Doubts to be solv'd, the map incognita, blanks to be fill'd,	  Doubts to be solv'd, the map incognita, blanks to be fill'd,	  Doubts to be solv'd, the map incognita, blanks to be fill'd,
  The foot of man unstay'd, the hands never at rest,	  The foot of man unstay'd, the hands never at rest,	  The foot of man unstay'd, the hands never at rest,	  The foot of man unstay'd, the hands never at rest,
  Thyself O soul that will not brook a challenge.	  Thyself O soul that will not brook a challenge.	  Thyself O soul that will not brook a challenge.	  Thyself O soul that will not brook a challenge.
			
  The mediaeval navigators rise before me,	  The mediaeval navigators rise before me,	  The mediaeval navigators rise before me,	  The mediaeval navigators rise before me,
  The world of 1492, with its awaken'd enterprise,	  The world of 1492, with its awaken'd enterprise,	  The world of 1492, with its awaken'd enterprise,	  The world of 1492, with its awaken'd enterprise,
  Something swelling in humanity now like the sap of the earth in spring,	  Something swelling in humanity now like the sap of the earth in spring,	  Something swelling in humanity now like the sap of the earth in spring,	  Something swelling in humanity now like the sap of the earth in spring,
  The sunset splendor of chivalry declining.	  The sunset splendor of chivalry declining.	  The sunset splendor of chivalry declining.	  The sunset splendor of chivalry declining.
			
  And who art thou sad shade?	  And who art thou sad shade?	  And who art thou sad shade?	  And who art thou sad shade?
  Gigantic, visionary, thyself a visionary,	  Gigantic, visionary, thyself a visionary,	  Gigantic, visionary, thyself a visionary,	  Gigantic, visionary, thyself a visionary,
  With majestic limbs and pious beaming eyes,	  With majestic limbs and pious beaming eyes,	  With majestic limbs and pious beaming eyes,	  With majestic limbs and pious beaming eyes,
  Spreading around with every look of thine a golden world,	  Spreading around with every look of thine a golden world,	  Spreading around with every look of thine a golden world,	  Spreading around with every look of thine a golden world,
  Enhuing it with gorgeous hues.	  Enhuing it with gorgeous hues.	  Enhuing it with gorgeous hues.	  Enhuing it with gorgeous hues.
			
  As the chief histrion,	  As the chief histrion,	  As the chief histrion,	  As the chief histrion,
  Down to the footlights walks in some great scena,	  Down to the footlights walks in some great scena,	  Down to the footlights walks in some great scena,	  Down to the footlights walks in some great scena,
  Dominating the rest I see the Admiral himself,	  Dominating the rest I see the Admiral himself,	  Dominating the rest I see the Admiral himself,	  Dominating the rest I see the Admiral himself,
  (History's type of courage, action, faith,)	  (History's type of courage, action, faith,)	  (History's type of courage, action, faith,)	  (History's type of courage, action, faith,)
  Behold him sail from Palos leading his little fleet,	  Behold him sail from Palos leading his little fleet,	  Behold him sail from Palos leading his little fleet,	  Behold him sail from Palos leading his little fleet,
  His voyage behold, his return, his great fame,	  His voyage behold, his return, his great fame,	  His voyage behold, his return, his great fame,	  His voyage behold, his return, his great fame,
  His misfortunes, calumniators, behold him a prisoner, chain'd,	  His misfortunes, calumniators, behold him a prisoner, chain'd,	  His misfortunes, calumniators, behold him a prisoner, chain'd,	  His misfortunes, calumniators, behold him a prisoner, chain'd,
  Behold his dejection, poverty, death.	  Behold his dejection, poverty, death.	  Behold his dejection, poverty, death.	  Behold his dejection, poverty, death.
			
  (Curious in time I stand, noting the efforts of heroes,	  (Curious in time I stand, noting the efforts of heroes,	  (Curious in time I stand, noting the efforts of heroes,	  (Curious in time I stand, noting the efforts of heroes,
  Is the deferment long? bitter the slander, poverty, death?	  Is the deferment long? bitter the slander, poverty, death?	  Is the deferment long? bitter the slander, poverty, death?	  Is the deferment long? bitter the slander, poverty, death?
  Lies the seed unreck'd for centuries in the ground? lo, to God's due	  Lies the seed unreck'd for centuries in the ground? lo, to God's due	  Lies the seed unreck'd for centuries in the ground? lo, to God's due	  Lies the seed unreck'd for centuries in the ground? lo, to God's due
      occasion,	      occasion,	      occasion,	      occasion,
  Uprising in the night, it sprouts, blooms,	  Uprising in the night, it sprouts, blooms,	  Uprising in the night, it sprouts, blooms,	  Uprising in the night, it sprouts, blooms,
  And fills the earth with use and beauty.)	  And fills the earth with use and beauty.)	  And fills the earth with use and beauty.)	  And fills the earth with use and beauty.)
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  Passage indeed O soul to primal thought,	  Passage indeed O soul to primal thought,	  Passage indeed O soul to primal thought,	  Passage indeed O soul to primal thought,
  Not lands and seas alone, thy own clear freshness,	  Not lands and seas alone, thy own clear freshness,	  Not lands and seas alone, thy own clear freshness,	  Not lands and seas alone, thy own clear freshness,
  The young maturity of brood and bloom,	  The young maturity of brood and bloom,	  The young maturity of brood and bloom,	  The young maturity of brood and bloom,
  To realms of budding bibles.	  To realms of budding bibles.	  To realms of budding bibles.	  To realms of budding bibles.
			
  O soul, repressless, I with thee and thou with me,	  O soul, repressless, I with thee and thou with me,	  O soul, repressless, I with thee and thou with me,	  O soul, repressless, I with thee and thou with me,
  Thy circumnavigation of the world begin,	  Thy circumnavigation of the world begin,	  Thy circumnavigation of the world begin,	  Thy circumnavigation of the world begin,
  Of man, the voyage of his mind's return,	  Of man, the voyage of his mind's return,	  Of man, the voyage of his mind's return,	  Of man, the voyage of his mind's return,
  To reason's early paradise,	  To reason's early paradise,	  To reason's early paradise,	  To reason's early paradise,
  Back, back to wisdom's birth, to innocent intuitions,	  Back, back to wisdom's birth, to innocent intuitions,	  Back, back to wisdom's birth, to innocent intuitions,	  Back, back to wisdom's birth, to innocent intuitions,
  Again with fair creation.	  Again with fair creation.	  Again with fair creation.	  Again with fair creation.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  O we can wait no longer,	  O we can wait no longer,	  O we can wait no longer,	  O we can wait no longer,
  We too take ship O soul,	  We too take ship O soul,	  We too take ship O soul,	  We too take ship O soul,
  Joyous we too launch out on trackless seas,	  Joyous we too launch out on trackless seas,	  Joyous we too launch out on trackless seas,	  Joyous we too launch out on trackless seas,
  Fearless for unknown shores on waves of ecstasy to sail,	  Fearless for unknown shores on waves of ecstasy to sail,	  Fearless for unknown shores on waves of ecstasy to sail,	  Fearless for unknown shores on waves of ecstasy to sail,
  Amid the wafting winds, (thou pressing me to thee, I thee to me, O soul,)	  Amid the wafting winds, (thou pressing me to thee, I thee to me, O soul,)	  Amid the wafting winds, (thou pressing me to thee, I thee to me, O soul,)	  Amid the wafting winds, (thou pressing me to thee, I thee to me, O soul,)
  Caroling free, singing our song of God,	  Caroling free, singing our song of God,	  Caroling free, singing our song of God,	  Caroling free, singing our song of God,
  Chanting our chant of pleasant exploration.	  Chanting our chant of pleasant exploration.	  Chanting our chant of pleasant exploration.	  Chanting our chant of pleasant exploration.
			
  With laugh and many a kiss,	  With laugh and many a kiss,	  With laugh and many a kiss,	  With laugh and many a kiss,
  (Let others deprecate, let others weep for sin, remorse, humiliation,)	  (Let others deprecate, let others weep for sin, remorse, humiliation,)	  (Let others deprecate, let others weep for sin, remorse, humiliation,)	  (Let others deprecate, let others weep for sin, remorse, humiliation,)
  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee.	  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee.	  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee.	  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee.
			
  Ah more than any priest O soul we too believe in God,	  Ah more than any priest O soul we too believe in God,	  Ah more than any priest O soul we too believe in God,	  Ah more than any priest O soul we too believe in God,
  But with the mystery of God we dare not dally.	  But with the mystery of God we dare not dally.	  But with the mystery of God we dare not dally.	  But with the mystery of God we dare not dally.
			
  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee,	  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee,	  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee,	  O soul thou pleasest me, I thee,
  Sailing these seas or on the hills, or waking in the night,	  Sailing these seas or on the hills, or waking in the night,	  Sailing these seas or on the hills, or waking in the night,	  Sailing these seas or on the hills, or waking in the night,
  Thoughts, silent thoughts, of Time and Space and Death, like waters flowing,	  Thoughts, silent thoughts, of Time and Space and Death, like waters flowing,	  Thoughts, silent thoughts, of Time and Space and Death, like waters flowing,	  Thoughts, silent thoughts, of Time and Space and Death, like waters flowing,
  Bear me indeed as through the regions infinite,	  Bear me indeed as through the regions infinite,	  Bear me indeed as through the regions infinite,	  Bear me indeed as through the regions infinite,
  Whose air I breathe, whose ripples hear, lave me all over,	  Whose air I breathe, whose ripples hear, lave me all over,	  Whose air I breathe, whose ripples hear, lave me all over,	  Whose air I breathe, whose ripples hear, lave me all over,
  Bathe me O God in thee, mounting to thee,	  Bathe me O God in thee, mounting to thee,	  Bathe me O God in thee, mounting to thee,	  Bathe me O God in thee, mounting to thee,
  I and my soul to range in range of thee.	  I and my soul to range in range of thee.	  I and my soul to range in range of thee.	  I and my soul to range in range of thee.
			
  O Thou transcendent,	  O Thou transcendent,	  O Thou transcendent,	  O Thou transcendent,
  Nameless, the fibre and the breath,	  Nameless, the fibre and the breath,	  Nameless, the fibre and the breath,	  Nameless, the fibre and the breath,
  Light of the light, shedding forth universes, thou centre of them,	  Light of the light, shedding forth universes, thou centre of them,	  Light of the light, shedding forth universes, thou centre of them,	  Light of the light, shedding forth universes, thou centre of them,
  Thou mightier centre of the true, the good, the loving,	  Thou mightier centre of the true, the good, the loving,	  Thou mightier centre of the true, the good, the loving,	  Thou mightier centre of the true, the good, the loving,
  Thou moral, spiritual fountain--affection's source--thou reservoir,	  Thou moral, spiritual fountain--affection's source--thou reservoir,	  Thou moral, spiritual fountain--affection's source--thou reservoir,	  Thou moral, spiritual fountain--affection's source--thou reservoir,
  (O pensive soul of me--O thirst unsatisfied--waitest not there?	  (O pensive soul of me--O thirst unsatisfied--waitest not there?	  (O pensive soul of me--O thirst unsatisfied--waitest not there?	  (O pensive soul of me--O thirst unsatisfied--waitest not there?
  Waitest not haply for us somewhere there the Comrade perfect?)	  Waitest not haply for us somewhere there the Comrade perfect?)	  Waitest not haply for us somewhere there the Comrade perfect?)	  Waitest not haply for us somewhere there the Comrade perfect?)
  Thou pulse--thou motive of the stars, suns, systems,	  Thou pulse--thou motive of the stars, suns, systems,	  Thou pulse--thou motive of the stars, suns, systems,	  Thou pulse--thou motive of the stars, suns, systems,
  That, circling, move in order, safe, harmonious,	  That, circling, move in order, safe, harmonious,	  That, circling, move in order, safe, harmonious,	  That, circling, move in order, safe, harmonious,
  Athwart the shapeless vastnesses of space,	  Athwart the shapeless vastnesses of space,	  Athwart the shapeless vastnesses of space,	  Athwart the shapeless vastnesses of space,
  How should I think, how breathe a single breath, how speak, if, out	  How should I think, how breathe a single breath, how speak, if, out	  How should I think, how breathe a single breath, how speak, if, out	  How should I think, how breathe a single breath, how speak, if, out
      of myself,	      of myself,	      of myself,	      of myself,
  I could not launch, to those, superior universes?	  I could not launch, to those, superior universes?	  I could not launch, to those, superior universes?	  I could not launch, to those, superior universes?
			
  Swiftly I shrivel at the thought of God,	  Swiftly I shrivel at the thought of God,	  Swiftly I shrivel at the thought of God,	  Swiftly I shrivel at the thought of God,
  At Nature and its wonders, Time and Space and Death,	  At Nature and its wonders, Time and Space and Death,	  At Nature and its wonders, Time and Space and Death,	  At Nature and its wonders, Time and Space and Death,
  But that I, turning, call to thee O soul, thou actual Me,	  But that I, turning, call to thee O soul, thou actual Me,	  But that I, turning, call to thee O soul, thou actual Me,	  But that I, turning, call to thee O soul, thou actual Me,
  And lo, thou gently masterest the orbs,	  And lo, thou gently masterest the orbs,	  And lo, thou gently masterest the orbs,	  And lo, thou gently masterest the orbs,
  Thou matest Time, smilest content at Death,	  Thou matest Time, smilest content at Death,	  Thou matest Time, smilest content at Death,	  Thou matest Time, smilest content at Death,
  And fillest, swellest full the vastnesses of Space.	  And fillest, swellest full the vastnesses of Space.	  And fillest, swellest full the vastnesses of Space.	  And fillest, swellest full the vastnesses of Space.
			
  Greater than stars or suns,	  Greater than stars or suns,	  Greater than stars or suns,	  Greater than stars or suns,
  Bounding O soul thou journeyest forth;	  Bounding O soul thou journeyest forth;	  Bounding O soul thou journeyest forth;	  Bounding O soul thou journeyest forth;
  What love than thine and ours could wider amplify?	  What love than thine and ours could wider amplify?	  What love than thine and ours could wider amplify?	  What love than thine and ours could wider amplify?
  What aspirations, wishes, outvie thine and ours O soul?	  What aspirations, wishes, outvie thine and ours O soul?	  What aspirations, wishes, outvie thine and ours O soul?	  What aspirations, wishes, outvie thine and ours O soul?
  What dreams of the ideal? what plans of purity, perfection, strength?	  What dreams of the ideal? what plans of purity, perfection, strength?	  What dreams of the ideal? what plans of purity, perfection, strength?	  What dreams of the ideal? what plans of purity, perfection, strength?
  What cheerful willingness for others' sake to give up all?	  What cheerful willingness for others' sake to give up all?	  What cheerful willingness for others' sake to give up all?	  What cheerful willingness for others' sake to give up all?
  For others' sake to suffer all?	  For others' sake to suffer all?	  For others' sake to suffer all?	  For others' sake to suffer all?
			
  Reckoning ahead O soul, when thou, the time achiev'd,	  Reckoning ahead O soul, when thou, the time achiev'd,	  Reckoning ahead O soul, when thou, the time achiev'd,	  Reckoning ahead O soul, when thou, the time achiev'd,
  The seas all cross'd, weather'd the capes, the voyage done,	  The seas all cross'd, weather'd the capes, the voyage done,	  The seas all cross'd, weather'd the capes, the voyage done,	  The seas all cross'd, weather'd the capes, the voyage done,
  Surrounded, copest, frontest God, yieldest, the aim attain'd,	  Surrounded, copest, frontest God, yieldest, the aim attain'd,	  Surrounded, copest, frontest God, yieldest, the aim attain'd,	  Surrounded, copest, frontest God, yieldest, the aim attain'd,
  As fill'd with friendship, love complete, the Elder Brother found,	  As fill'd with friendship, love complete, the Elder Brother found,	  As fill'd with friendship, love complete, the Elder Brother found,	  As fill'd with friendship, love complete, the Elder Brother found,
  The Younger melts in fondness in his arms.	  The Younger melts in fondness in his arms.	  The Younger melts in fondness in his arms.	  The Younger melts in fondness in his arms.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  Passage to more than India!	  Passage to more than India!	  Passage to more than India!	  Passage to more than India!
  Are thy wings plumed indeed for such far flights?	  Are thy wings plumed indeed for such far flights?	  Are thy wings plumed indeed for such far flights?	  Are thy wings plumed indeed for such far flights?
  O soul, voyagest thou indeed on voyages like those?	  O soul, voyagest thou indeed on voyages like those?	  O soul, voyagest thou indeed on voyages like those?	  O soul, voyagest thou indeed on voyages like those?
  Disportest thou on waters such as those?	  Disportest thou on waters such as those?	  Disportest thou on waters such as those?	  Disportest thou on waters such as those?
  Soundest below the Sanscrit and the Vedas?	  Soundest below the Sanscrit and the Vedas?	  Soundest below the Sanscrit and the Vedas?	  Soundest below the Sanscrit and the Vedas?
  Then have thy bent unleash'd.	  Then have thy bent unleash'd.	  Then have thy bent unleash'd.	  Then have thy bent unleash'd.
			
  Passage to you, your shores, ye aged fierce enigmas!	  Passage to you, your shores, ye aged fierce enigmas!	  Passage to you, your shores, ye aged fierce enigmas!	  Passage to you, your shores, ye aged fierce enigmas!
  Passage to you, to mastership of you, ye strangling problems!	  Passage to you, to mastership of you, ye strangling problems!	  Passage to you, to mastership of you, ye strangling problems!	  Passage to you, to mastership of you, ye strangling problems!
  You, strew'd with the wrecks of skeletons, that, living, never reach'd you.	  You, strew'd with the wrecks of skeletons, that, living, never reach'd you.	  You, strew'd with the wrecks of skeletons, that, living, never reach'd you.	  You, strew'd with the wrecks of skeletons, that, living, never reach'd you.
			
  Passage to more than India!	  Passage to more than India!	  Passage to more than India!	  Passage to more than India!
  O secret of the earth and sky!	  O secret of the earth and sky!	  O secret of the earth and sky!	  O secret of the earth and sky!
  Of you O waters of the sea! O winding creeks and rivers!	  Of you O waters of the sea! O winding creeks and rivers!	  Of you O waters of the sea! O winding creeks and rivers!	  Of you O waters of the sea! O winding creeks and rivers!
  Of you O woods and fields! of you strong mountains of my land!	  Of you O woods and fields! of you strong mountains of my land!	  Of you O woods and fields! of you strong mountains of my land!	  Of you O woods and fields! of you strong mountains of my land!
  Of you O prairies! of you gray rocks!	  Of you O prairies! of you gray rocks!	  Of you O prairies! of you gray rocks!	  Of you O prairies! of you gray rocks!
  O morning red! O clouds! O rain and snows!	  O morning red! O clouds! O rain and snows!	  O morning red! O clouds! O rain and snows!	  O morning red! O clouds! O rain and snows!
  O day and night, passage to you!	  O day and night, passage to you!	  O day and night, passage to you!	  O day and night, passage to you!
			
			
  O sun and moon and all you stars! Sirius and Jupiter!	  O sun and moon and all you stars! Sirius and Jupiter!	  O sun and moon and all you stars! Sirius and Jupiter!	  O sun and moon and all you stars! Sirius and Jupiter!
  Passage to you!	  Passage to you!	  Passage to you!	  Passage to you!
			
  Passage, immediate passage! the blood burns in my veins!	  Passage, immediate passage! the blood burns in my veins!	  Passage, immediate passage! the blood burns in my veins!	  Passage, immediate passage! the blood burns in my veins!
  Away O soul! hoist instantly the anchor!	  Away O soul! hoist instantly the anchor!	  Away O soul! hoist instantly the anchor!	  Away O soul! hoist instantly the anchor!
			
  Cut the hawsers--haul out--shake out every sail!	  Cut the hawsers--haul out--shake out every sail!	  Cut the hawsers--haul out--shake out every sail!	  Cut the hawsers--haul out--shake out every sail!
  Have we not stood here like trees in the ground long enough?	  Have we not stood here like trees in the ground long enough?	  Have we not stood here like trees in the ground long enough?	  Have we not stood here like trees in the ground long enough?
  Have we not grovel'd here long enough, eating and drinking like mere brutes?	  Have we not grovel'd here long enough, eating and drinking like mere brutes?	  Have we not grovel'd here long enough, eating and drinking like mere brutes?	  Have we not grovel'd here long enough, eating and drinking like mere brutes?
  Have we not darken'd and dazed ourselves with books long enough?	  Have we not darken'd and dazed ourselves with books long enough?	  Have we not darken'd and dazed ourselves with books long enough?	  Have we not darken'd and dazed ourselves with books long enough?
			
  Sail forth--steer for the deep waters only,	  Sail forth--steer for the deep waters only,	  Sail forth--steer for the deep waters only,	  Sail forth--steer for the deep waters only,
  Reckless O soul, exploring, I with thee, and thou with me,	  Reckless O soul, exploring, I with thee, and thou with me,	  Reckless O soul, exploring, I with thee, and thou with me,	  Reckless O soul, exploring, I with thee, and thou with me,
  For we are bound where mariner has not yet dared to go,	  For we are bound where mariner has not yet dared to go,	  For we are bound where mariner has not yet dared to go,	  For we are bound where mariner has not yet dared to go,
  And we will risk the ship, ourselves and all.	  And we will risk the ship, ourselves and all.	  And we will risk the ship, ourselves and all.	  And we will risk the ship, ourselves and all.
			
  O my brave soul!	  O my brave soul!	  O my brave soul!	  O my brave soul!
  O farther farther sail!	  O farther farther sail!	  O farther farther sail!	  O farther farther sail!
  O daring joy, but safe! are they not all the seas of God?	  O daring joy, but safe! are they not all the seas of God?	  O daring joy, but safe! are they not all the seas of God?	  O daring joy, but safe! are they not all the seas of God?
  O farther, farther, farther sail!	  O farther, farther, farther sail!	  O farther, farther, farther sail!	  O farther, farther, farther sail!
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXVII	BOOK XXVII	BOOK XXVII	BOOK XXVII
			
			
Prayer of Columbus	Prayer of Columbus	Prayer of Columbus	Prayer of Columbus
			
  A batter'd, wreck'd old man,	  A batter'd, wreck'd old man,	  A batter'd, wreck'd old man,	  A batter'd, wreck'd old man,
  Thrown on this savage shore, far, far from home,	  Thrown on this savage shore, far, far from home,	  Thrown on this savage shore, far, far from home,	  Thrown on this savage shore, far, far from home,
  Pent by the sea and dark rebellious brows, twelve dreary months,	  Pent by the sea and dark rebellious brows, twelve dreary months,	  Pent by the sea and dark rebellious brows, twelve dreary months,	  Pent by the sea and dark rebellious brows, twelve dreary months,
  Sore, stiff with many toils, sicken'd and nigh to death,	  Sore, stiff with many toils, sicken'd and nigh to death,	  Sore, stiff with many toils, sicken'd and nigh to death,	  Sore, stiff with many toils, sicken'd and nigh to death,
  I take my way along the island's edge,	  I take my way along the island's edge,	  I take my way along the island's edge,	  I take my way along the island's edge,
  Venting a heavy heart.	  Venting a heavy heart.	  Venting a heavy heart.	  Venting a heavy heart.
			
  I am too full of woe!	  I am too full of woe!	  I am too full of woe!	  I am too full of woe!
  Haply I may not live another day;	  Haply I may not live another day;	  Haply I may not live another day;	  Haply I may not live another day;
  I cannot rest O God, I cannot eat or drink or sleep,	  I cannot rest O God, I cannot eat or drink or sleep,	  I cannot rest O God, I cannot eat or drink or sleep,	  I cannot rest O God, I cannot eat or drink or sleep,
  Till I put forth myself, my prayer, once more to Thee,	  Till I put forth myself, my prayer, once more to Thee,	  Till I put forth myself, my prayer, once more to Thee,	  Till I put forth myself, my prayer, once more to Thee,
  Breathe, bathe myself once more in Thee, commune with Thee,	  Breathe, bathe myself once more in Thee, commune with Thee,	  Breathe, bathe myself once more in Thee, commune with Thee,	  Breathe, bathe myself once more in Thee, commune with Thee,
  Report myself once more to Thee.	  Report myself once more to Thee.	  Report myself once more to Thee.	  Report myself once more to Thee.
			
  Thou knowest my years entire, my life,	  Thou knowest my years entire, my life,	  Thou knowest my years entire, my life,	  Thou knowest my years entire, my life,
  My long and crowded life of active work, not adoration merely;	  My long and crowded life of active work, not adoration merely;	  My long and crowded life of active work, not adoration merely;	  My long and crowded life of active work, not adoration merely;
  Thou knowest the prayers and vigils of my youth,	  Thou knowest the prayers and vigils of my youth,	  Thou knowest the prayers and vigils of my youth,	  Thou knowest the prayers and vigils of my youth,
  Thou knowest my manhood's solemn and visionary meditations,	  Thou knowest my manhood's solemn and visionary meditations,	  Thou knowest my manhood's solemn and visionary meditations,	  Thou knowest my manhood's solemn and visionary meditations,
  Thou knowest how before I commenced I devoted all to come to Thee,	  Thou knowest how before I commenced I devoted all to come to Thee,	  Thou knowest how before I commenced I devoted all to come to Thee,	  Thou knowest how before I commenced I devoted all to come to Thee,
  Thou knowest I have in age ratified all those vows and strictly kept them,	  Thou knowest I have in age ratified all those vows and strictly kept them,	  Thou knowest I have in age ratified all those vows and strictly kept them,	  Thou knowest I have in age ratified all those vows and strictly kept them,
  Thou knowest I have not once lost nor faith nor ecstasy in Thee,	  Thou knowest I have not once lost nor faith nor ecstasy in Thee,	  Thou knowest I have not once lost nor faith nor ecstasy in Thee,	  Thou knowest I have not once lost nor faith nor ecstasy in Thee,
  In shackles, prison'd, in disgrace, repining not,	  In shackles, prison'd, in disgrace, repining not,	  In shackles, prison'd, in disgrace, repining not,	  In shackles, prison'd, in disgrace, repining not,
  Accepting all from Thee, as duly come from Thee.	  Accepting all from Thee, as duly come from Thee.	  Accepting all from Thee, as duly come from Thee.	  Accepting all from Thee, as duly come from Thee.
			
  All my emprises have been fill'd with Thee,	  All my emprises have been fill'd with Thee,	  All my emprises have been fill'd with Thee,	  All my emprises have been fill'd with Thee,
  My speculations, plans, begun and carried on in thoughts of Thee,	  My speculations, plans, begun and carried on in thoughts of Thee,	  My speculations, plans, begun and carried on in thoughts of Thee,	  My speculations, plans, begun and carried on in thoughts of Thee,
  Sailing the deep or journeying the land for Thee;	  Sailing the deep or journeying the land for Thee;	  Sailing the deep or journeying the land for Thee;	  Sailing the deep or journeying the land for Thee;
  Intentions, purports, aspirations mine, leaving results to Thee.	  Intentions, purports, aspirations mine, leaving results to Thee.	  Intentions, purports, aspirations mine, leaving results to Thee.	  Intentions, purports, aspirations mine, leaving results to Thee.
			
  O I am sure they really came from Thee,	  O I am sure they really came from Thee,	  O I am sure they really came from Thee,	  O I am sure they really came from Thee,
  The urge, the ardor, the unconquerable will,	  The urge, the ardor, the unconquerable will,	  The urge, the ardor, the unconquerable will,	  The urge, the ardor, the unconquerable will,
  The potent, felt, interior command, stronger than words,	  The potent, felt, interior command, stronger than words,	  The potent, felt, interior command, stronger than words,	  The potent, felt, interior command, stronger than words,
  A message from the Heavens whispering to me even in sleep,	  A message from the Heavens whispering to me even in sleep,	  A message from the Heavens whispering to me even in sleep,	  A message from the Heavens whispering to me even in sleep,
  These sped me on.	  These sped me on.	  These sped me on.	  These sped me on.
			
  By me and these the work so far accomplish'd,	  By me and these the work so far accomplish'd,	  By me and these the work so far accomplish'd,	  By me and these the work so far accomplish'd,
  By me earth's elder cloy'd and stifled lands uncloy'd, unloos'd,	  By me earth's elder cloy'd and stifled lands uncloy'd, unloos'd,	  By me earth's elder cloy'd and stifled lands uncloy'd, unloos'd,	  By me earth's elder cloy'd and stifled lands uncloy'd, unloos'd,
  By me the hemispheres rounded and tied, the unknown to the known.	  By me the hemispheres rounded and tied, the unknown to the known.	  By me the hemispheres rounded and tied, the unknown to the known.	  By me the hemispheres rounded and tied, the unknown to the known.
			
  The end I know not, it is all in Thee,	  The end I know not, it is all in Thee,	  The end I know not, it is all in Thee,	  The end I know not, it is all in Thee,
  Or small or great I know not--haply what broad fields, what lands,	  Or small or great I know not--haply what broad fields, what lands,	  Or small or great I know not--haply what broad fields, what lands,	  Or small or great I know not--haply what broad fields, what lands,
  Haply the brutish measureless human undergrowth I know,	  Haply the brutish measureless human undergrowth I know,	  Haply the brutish measureless human undergrowth I know,	  Haply the brutish measureless human undergrowth I know,
  Transplanted there may rise to stature, knowledge worthy Thee,	  Transplanted there may rise to stature, knowledge worthy Thee,	  Transplanted there may rise to stature, knowledge worthy Thee,	  Transplanted there may rise to stature, knowledge worthy Thee,
  Haply the swords I know may there indeed be turn'd to reaping-tools,	  Haply the swords I know may there indeed be turn'd to reaping-tools,	  Haply the swords I know may there indeed be turn'd to reaping-tools,	  Haply the swords I know may there indeed be turn'd to reaping-tools,
  Haply the lifeless cross I know, Europe's dead cross, may bud and	  Haply the lifeless cross I know, Europe's dead cross, may bud and	  Haply the lifeless cross I know, Europe's dead cross, may bud and	  Haply the lifeless cross I know, Europe's dead cross, may bud and
      blossom there.	      blossom there.	      blossom there.	      blossom there.
			
  One effort more, my altar this bleak sand;	  One effort more, my altar this bleak sand;	  One effort more, my altar this bleak sand;	  One effort more, my altar this bleak sand;
  That Thou O God my life hast lighted,	  That Thou O God my life hast lighted,	  That Thou O God my life hast lighted,	  That Thou O God my life hast lighted,
  With ray of light, steady, ineffable, vouchsafed of Thee,	  With ray of light, steady, ineffable, vouchsafed of Thee,	  With ray of light, steady, ineffable, vouchsafed of Thee,	  With ray of light, steady, ineffable, vouchsafed of Thee,
  Light rare untellable, lighting the very light,	  Light rare untellable, lighting the very light,	  Light rare untellable, lighting the very light,	  Light rare untellable, lighting the very light,
  Beyond all signs, descriptions, languages;	  Beyond all signs, descriptions, languages;	  Beyond all signs, descriptions, languages;	  Beyond all signs, descriptions, languages;
  For that O God, be it my latest word, here on my knees,	  For that O God, be it my latest word, here on my knees,	  For that O God, be it my latest word, here on my knees,	  For that O God, be it my latest word, here on my knees,
  Old, poor, and paralyzed, I thank Thee.	  Old, poor, and paralyzed, I thank Thee.	  Old, poor, and paralyzed, I thank Thee.	  Old, poor, and paralyzed, I thank Thee.
			
  My terminus near,	  My terminus near,	  My terminus near,	  My terminus near,
  The clouds already closing in upon me,	  The clouds already closing in upon me,	  The clouds already closing in upon me,	  The clouds already closing in upon me,
  The voyage balk'd, the course disputed, lost,	  The voyage balk'd, the course disputed, lost,	  The voyage balk'd, the course disputed, lost,	  The voyage balk'd, the course disputed, lost,
  I yield my ships to Thee.	  I yield my ships to Thee.	  I yield my ships to Thee.	  I yield my ships to Thee.
			
  My hands, my limbs grow nerveless,	  My hands, my limbs grow nerveless,	  My hands, my limbs grow nerveless,	  My hands, my limbs grow nerveless,
  My brain feels rack'd, bewilder'd,	  My brain feels rack'd, bewilder'd,	  My brain feels rack'd, bewilder'd,	  My brain feels rack'd, bewilder'd,
  Let the old timbers part, I will not part,	  Let the old timbers part, I will not part,	  Let the old timbers part, I will not part,	  Let the old timbers part, I will not part,
  I will cling fast to Thee, O God, though the waves buffet me,	  I will cling fast to Thee, O God, though the waves buffet me,	  I will cling fast to Thee, O God, though the waves buffet me,	  I will cling fast to Thee, O God, though the waves buffet me,
  Thee, Thee at least I know.	  Thee, Thee at least I know.	  Thee, Thee at least I know.	  Thee, Thee at least I know.
			
  Is it the prophet's thought I speak, or am I raving?	  Is it the prophet's thought I speak, or am I raving?	  Is it the prophet's thought I speak, or am I raving?	  Is it the prophet's thought I speak, or am I raving?
  What do I know of life? what of myself?	  What do I know of life? what of myself?	  What do I know of life? what of myself?	  What do I know of life? what of myself?
  I know not even my own work past or present,	  I know not even my own work past or present,	  I know not even my own work past or present,	  I know not even my own work past or present,
  Dim ever-shifting guesses of it spread before me,	  Dim ever-shifting guesses of it spread before me,	  Dim ever-shifting guesses of it spread before me,	  Dim ever-shifting guesses of it spread before me,
  Of newer better worlds, their mighty parturition,	  Of newer better worlds, their mighty parturition,	  Of newer better worlds, their mighty parturition,	  Of newer better worlds, their mighty parturition,
  Mocking, perplexing me.	  Mocking, perplexing me.	  Mocking, perplexing me.	  Mocking, perplexing me.
			
  And these things I see suddenly, what mean they?	  And these things I see suddenly, what mean they?	  And these things I see suddenly, what mean they?	  And these things I see suddenly, what mean they?
  As if some miracle, some hand divine unseal'd my eyes,	  As if some miracle, some hand divine unseal'd my eyes,	  As if some miracle, some hand divine unseal'd my eyes,	  As if some miracle, some hand divine unseal'd my eyes,
  Shadowy vast shapes smile through the air and sky,	  Shadowy vast shapes smile through the air and sky,	  Shadowy vast shapes smile through the air and sky,	  Shadowy vast shapes smile through the air and sky,
  And on the distant waves sail countless ships,	  And on the distant waves sail countless ships,	  And on the distant waves sail countless ships,	  And on the distant waves sail countless ships,
  And anthems in new tongues I hear saluting me.	  And anthems in new tongues I hear saluting me.	  And anthems in new tongues I hear saluting me.	  And anthems in new tongues I hear saluting me.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXVIII	BOOK XXVIII	BOOK XXVIII	BOOK XXVIII
			
			
The Sleepers	The Sleepers	The Sleepers	The Sleepers
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  I wander all night in my vision,	  I wander all night in my vision,	  I wander all night in my vision,	  I wander all night in my vision,
  Stepping with light feet, swiftly and noiselessly stepping and stopping,	  Stepping with light feet, swiftly and noiselessly stepping and stopping,	  Stepping with light feet, swiftly and noiselessly stepping and stopping,	  Stepping with light feet, swiftly and noiselessly stepping and stopping,
  Bending with open eyes over the shut eyes of sleepers,	  Bending with open eyes over the shut eyes of sleepers,	  Bending with open eyes over the shut eyes of sleepers,	  Bending with open eyes over the shut eyes of sleepers,
  Wandering and confused, lost to myself, ill-assorted, contradictory,	  Wandering and confused, lost to myself, ill-assorted, contradictory,	  Wandering and confused, lost to myself, ill-assorted, contradictory,	  Wandering and confused, lost to myself, ill-assorted, contradictory,
  Pausing, gazing, bending, and stopping.	  Pausing, gazing, bending, and stopping.	  Pausing, gazing, bending, and stopping.	  Pausing, gazing, bending, and stopping.
			
  How solemn they look there, stretch'd and still,	  How solemn they look there, stretch'd and still,	  How solemn they look there, stretch'd and still,	  How solemn they look there, stretch'd and still,
  How quiet they breathe, the little children in their cradles.	  How quiet they breathe, the little children in their cradles.	  How quiet they breathe, the little children in their cradles.	  How quiet they breathe, the little children in their cradles.
			
  The wretched features of ennuyes, the white features of corpses, the	  The wretched features of ennuyes, the white features of corpses, the	  The wretched features of ennuyes, the white features of corpses, the	  The wretched features of ennuyes, the white features of corpses, the
      livid faces of drunkards, the sick-gray faces of onanists,	      livid faces of drunkards, the sick-gray faces of onanists,	      livid faces of drunkards, the sick-gray faces of onanists,	      livid faces of drunkards, the sick-gray faces of onanists,
  The gash'd bodies on battle-fields, the insane in their	  The gash'd bodies on battle-fields, the insane in their	  The gash'd bodies on battle-fields, the insane in their	  The gash'd bodies on battle-fields, the insane in their
      strong-door'd rooms, the sacred idiots, the new-born emerging	      strong-door'd rooms, the sacred idiots, the new-born emerging	      strong-door'd rooms, the sacred idiots, the new-born emerging	      strong-door'd rooms, the sacred idiots, the new-born emerging
      from gates, and the dying emerging from gates,	      from gates, and the dying emerging from gates,	      from gates, and the dying emerging from gates,	      from gates, and the dying emerging from gates,
  The night pervades them and infolds them.	  The night pervades them and infolds them.	  The night pervades them and infolds them.	  The night pervades them and infolds them.
			
  The married couple sleep calmly in their bed, he with his palm on	  The married couple sleep calmly in their bed, he with his palm on	  The married couple sleep calmly in their bed, he with his palm on	  The married couple sleep calmly in their bed, he with his palm on
      the hip of the wife, and she with her palm on the hip of the husband,	      the hip of the wife, and she with her palm on the hip of the husband,	      the hip of the wife, and she with her palm on the hip of the husband,	      the hip of the wife, and she with her palm on the hip of the husband,
  The sisters sleep lovingly side by side in their bed,	  The sisters sleep lovingly side by side in their bed,	  The sisters sleep lovingly side by side in their bed,	  The sisters sleep lovingly side by side in their bed,
  The men sleep lovingly side by side in theirs,	  The men sleep lovingly side by side in theirs,	  The men sleep lovingly side by side in theirs,	  The men sleep lovingly side by side in theirs,
  And the mother sleeps with her little child carefully wrapt.	  And the mother sleeps with her little child carefully wrapt.	  And the mother sleeps with her little child carefully wrapt.	  And the mother sleeps with her little child carefully wrapt.
			
  The blind sleep, and the deaf and dumb sleep,	  The blind sleep, and the deaf and dumb sleep,	  The blind sleep, and the deaf and dumb sleep,	  The blind sleep, and the deaf and dumb sleep,
  The prisoner sleeps well in the prison, the runaway son sleeps,	  The prisoner sleeps well in the prison, the runaway son sleeps,	  The prisoner sleeps well in the prison, the runaway son sleeps,	  The prisoner sleeps well in the prison, the runaway son sleeps,
  The murderer that is to be hung next day, how does he sleep?	  The murderer that is to be hung next day, how does he sleep?	  The murderer that is to be hung next day, how does he sleep?	  The murderer that is to be hung next day, how does he sleep?
  And the murder'd person, how does he sleep?	  And the murder'd person, how does he sleep?	  And the murder'd person, how does he sleep?	  And the murder'd person, how does he sleep?
			
  The female that loves unrequited sleeps,	  The female that loves unrequited sleeps,	  The female that loves unrequited sleeps,	  The female that loves unrequited sleeps,
  And the male that loves unrequited sleeps,	  And the male that loves unrequited sleeps,	  And the male that loves unrequited sleeps,	  And the male that loves unrequited sleeps,
  The head of the money-maker that plotted all day sleeps,	  The head of the money-maker that plotted all day sleeps,	  The head of the money-maker that plotted all day sleeps,	  The head of the money-maker that plotted all day sleeps,
  And the enraged and treacherous dispositions, all, all sleep.	  And the enraged and treacherous dispositions, all, all sleep.	  And the enraged and treacherous dispositions, all, all sleep.	  And the enraged and treacherous dispositions, all, all sleep.
			
  I stand in the dark with drooping eyes by the worst-suffering and	  I stand in the dark with drooping eyes by the worst-suffering and	  I stand in the dark with drooping eyes by the worst-suffering and	  I stand in the dark with drooping eyes by the worst-suffering and
      the most restless,	      the most restless,	      the most restless,	      the most restless,
  I pass my hands soothingly to and fro a few inches from them,	  I pass my hands soothingly to and fro a few inches from them,	  I pass my hands soothingly to and fro a few inches from them,	  I pass my hands soothingly to and fro a few inches from them,
  The restless sink in their beds, they fitfully sleep.	  The restless sink in their beds, they fitfully sleep.	  The restless sink in their beds, they fitfully sleep.	  The restless sink in their beds, they fitfully sleep.
			
  Now I pierce the darkness, new beings appear,	  Now I pierce the darkness, new beings appear,	  Now I pierce the darkness, new beings appear,	  Now I pierce the darkness, new beings appear,
  The earth recedes from me into the night,	  The earth recedes from me into the night,	  The earth recedes from me into the night,	  The earth recedes from me into the night,
  I saw that it was beautiful, and I see that what is not the earth is	  I saw that it was beautiful, and I see that what is not the earth is	  I saw that it was beautiful, and I see that what is not the earth is	  I saw that it was beautiful, and I see that what is not the earth is
      beautiful.	      beautiful.	      beautiful.	      beautiful.
			
  I go from bedside to bedside, I sleep close with the other sleepers	  I go from bedside to bedside, I sleep close with the other sleepers	  I go from bedside to bedside, I sleep close with the other sleepers	  I go from bedside to bedside, I sleep close with the other sleepers
      each in turn,	      each in turn,	      each in turn,	      each in turn,
  I dream in my dream all the dreams of the other dreamers,	  I dream in my dream all the dreams of the other dreamers,	  I dream in my dream all the dreams of the other dreamers,	  I dream in my dream all the dreams of the other dreamers,
  And I become the other dreamers.	  And I become the other dreamers.	  And I become the other dreamers.	  And I become the other dreamers.
			
  I am a dance--play up there! the fit is whirling me fast!	  I am a dance--play up there! the fit is whirling me fast!	  I am a dance--play up there! the fit is whirling me fast!	  I am a dance--play up there! the fit is whirling me fast!
			
  I am the ever-laughing--it is new moon and twilight,	  I am the ever-laughing--it is new moon and twilight,	  I am the ever-laughing--it is new moon and twilight,	  I am the ever-laughing--it is new moon and twilight,
  I see the hiding of douceurs, I see nimble ghosts whichever way look,	  I see the hiding of douceurs, I see nimble ghosts whichever way look,	  I see the hiding of douceurs, I see nimble ghosts whichever way look,	  I see the hiding of douceurs, I see nimble ghosts whichever way look,
  Cache and cache again deep in the ground and sea, and where it is	  Cache and cache again deep in the ground and sea, and where it is	  Cache and cache again deep in the ground and sea, and where it is	  Cache and cache again deep in the ground and sea, and where it is
      neither ground nor sea.	      neither ground nor sea.	      neither ground nor sea.	      neither ground nor sea.
			
  Well do they do their jobs those journeymen divine,	  Well do they do their jobs those journeymen divine,	  Well do they do their jobs those journeymen divine,	  Well do they do their jobs those journeymen divine,
  Only from me can they hide nothing, and would not if they could,	  Only from me can they hide nothing, and would not if they could,	  Only from me can they hide nothing, and would not if they could,	  Only from me can they hide nothing, and would not if they could,
  I reckon I am their boss and they make me a pet besides,	  I reckon I am their boss and they make me a pet besides,	  I reckon I am their boss and they make me a pet besides,	  I reckon I am their boss and they make me a pet besides,
  And surround me and lead me and run ahead when I walk,	  And surround me and lead me and run ahead when I walk,	  And surround me and lead me and run ahead when I walk,	  And surround me and lead me and run ahead when I walk,
  To lift their cunning covers to signify me with stretch'd arms, and	  To lift their cunning covers to signify me with stretch'd arms, and	  To lift their cunning covers to signify me with stretch'd arms, and	  To lift their cunning covers to signify me with stretch'd arms, and
      resume the way;	      resume the way;	      resume the way;	      resume the way;
  Onward we move, a gay gang of blackguards! with mirth-shouting	  Onward we move, a gay gang of blackguards! with mirth-shouting	  Onward we move, a gay gang of blackguards! with mirth-shouting	  Onward we move, a gay gang of blackguards! with mirth-shouting
      music and wild-flapping pennants of joy!	      music and wild-flapping pennants of joy!	      music and wild-flapping pennants of joy!	      music and wild-flapping pennants of joy!
			
  I am the actor, the actress, the voter, the politician,	  I am the actor, the actress, the voter, the politician,	  I am the actor, the actress, the voter, the politician,	  I am the actor, the actress, the voter, the politician,
  The emigrant and the exile, the criminal that stood in the box,	  The emigrant and the exile, the criminal that stood in the box,	  The emigrant and the exile, the criminal that stood in the box,	  The emigrant and the exile, the criminal that stood in the box,
  He who has been famous and he who shall be famous after to-day,	  He who has been famous and he who shall be famous after to-day,	  He who has been famous and he who shall be famous after to-day,	  He who has been famous and he who shall be famous after to-day,
  The stammerer, the well-form'd person, the wasted or feeble person.	  The stammerer, the well-form'd person, the wasted or feeble person.	  The stammerer, the well-form'd person, the wasted or feeble person.	  The stammerer, the well-form'd person, the wasted or feeble person.
			
  I am she who adorn'd herself and folded her hair expectantly,	  I am she who adorn'd herself and folded her hair expectantly,	  I am she who adorn'd herself and folded her hair expectantly,	  I am she who adorn'd herself and folded her hair expectantly,
  My truant lover has come, and it is dark.	  My truant lover has come, and it is dark.	  My truant lover has come, and it is dark.	  My truant lover has come, and it is dark.
			
  Double yourself and receive me darkness,	  Double yourself and receive me darkness,	  Double yourself and receive me darkness,	  Double yourself and receive me darkness,
  Receive me and my lover too, he will not let me go without him.	  Receive me and my lover too, he will not let me go without him.	  Receive me and my lover too, he will not let me go without him.	  Receive me and my lover too, he will not let me go without him.
			
  I roll myself upon you as upon a bed, I resign myself to the dusk.	  I roll myself upon you as upon a bed, I resign myself to the dusk.	  I roll myself upon you as upon a bed, I resign myself to the dusk.	  I roll myself upon you as upon a bed, I resign myself to the dusk.
			
  He whom I call answers me and takes the place of my lover,	  He whom I call answers me and takes the place of my lover,	  He whom I call answers me and takes the place of my lover,	  He whom I call answers me and takes the place of my lover,
  He rises with me silently from the bed.	  He rises with me silently from the bed.	  He rises with me silently from the bed.	  He rises with me silently from the bed.
			
  Darkness, you are gentler than my lover, his flesh was sweaty and panting,	  Darkness, you are gentler than my lover, his flesh was sweaty and panting,	  Darkness, you are gentler than my lover, his flesh was sweaty and panting,	  Darkness, you are gentler than my lover, his flesh was sweaty and panting,
  I feel the hot moisture yet that he left me.	  I feel the hot moisture yet that he left me.	  I feel the hot moisture yet that he left me.	  I feel the hot moisture yet that he left me.
			
  My hands are spread forth, I pass them in all directions,	  My hands are spread forth, I pass them in all directions,	  My hands are spread forth, I pass them in all directions,	  My hands are spread forth, I pass them in all directions,
  I would sound up the shadowy shore to which you are journeying.	  I would sound up the shadowy shore to which you are journeying.	  I would sound up the shadowy shore to which you are journeying.	  I would sound up the shadowy shore to which you are journeying.
			
  Be careful darkness! already what was it touch'd me?	  Be careful darkness! already what was it touch'd me?	  Be careful darkness! already what was it touch'd me?	  Be careful darkness! already what was it touch'd me?
  I thought my lover had gone, else darkness and he are one,	  I thought my lover had gone, else darkness and he are one,	  I thought my lover had gone, else darkness and he are one,	  I thought my lover had gone, else darkness and he are one,
  I hear the heart-beat, I follow, I fade away.	  I hear the heart-beat, I follow, I fade away.	  I hear the heart-beat, I follow, I fade away.	  I hear the heart-beat, I follow, I fade away.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  I descend my western course, my sinews are flaccid,	  I descend my western course, my sinews are flaccid,	  I descend my western course, my sinews are flaccid,	  I descend my western course, my sinews are flaccid,
  Perfume and youth course through me and I am their wake.	  Perfume and youth course through me and I am their wake.	  Perfume and youth course through me and I am their wake.	  Perfume and youth course through me and I am their wake.
			
  It is my face yellow and wrinkled instead of the old woman's,	  It is my face yellow and wrinkled instead of the old woman's,	  It is my face yellow and wrinkled instead of the old woman's,	  It is my face yellow and wrinkled instead of the old woman's,
  I sit low in a straw-bottom chair and carefully darn my grandson's	  I sit low in a straw-bottom chair and carefully darn my grandson's	  I sit low in a straw-bottom chair and carefully darn my grandson's	  I sit low in a straw-bottom chair and carefully darn my grandson's
      stockings.	      stockings.	      stockings.	      stockings.
			
  It is I too, the sleepless widow looking out on the winter midnight,	  It is I too, the sleepless widow looking out on the winter midnight,	  It is I too, the sleepless widow looking out on the winter midnight,	  It is I too, the sleepless widow looking out on the winter midnight,
  I see the sparkles of starshine on the icy and pallid earth.	  I see the sparkles of starshine on the icy and pallid earth.	  I see the sparkles of starshine on the icy and pallid earth.	  I see the sparkles of starshine on the icy and pallid earth.
			
  A shroud I see and I am the shroud, I wrap a body and lie in the coffin,	  A shroud I see and I am the shroud, I wrap a body and lie in the coffin,	  A shroud I see and I am the shroud, I wrap a body and lie in the coffin,	  A shroud I see and I am the shroud, I wrap a body and lie in the coffin,
  It is dark here under ground, it is not evil or pain here, it is	  It is dark here under ground, it is not evil or pain here, it is	  It is dark here under ground, it is not evil or pain here, it is	  It is dark here under ground, it is not evil or pain here, it is
      blank here, for reasons.	      blank here, for reasons.	      blank here, for reasons.	      blank here, for reasons.
			
  (It seems to me that every thing in the light and air ought to be happy,	  (It seems to me that every thing in the light and air ought to be happy,	  (It seems to me that every thing in the light and air ought to be happy,	  (It seems to me that every thing in the light and air ought to be happy,
  Whoever is not in his coffin and the dark grave let him know he has enough.)	  Whoever is not in his coffin and the dark grave let him know he has enough.)	  Whoever is not in his coffin and the dark grave let him know he has enough.)	  Whoever is not in his coffin and the dark grave let him know he has enough.)
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer swimming naked through the eddies	  I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer swimming naked through the eddies	  I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer swimming naked through the eddies	  I see a beautiful gigantic swimmer swimming naked through the eddies
      of the sea,	      of the sea,	      of the sea,	      of the sea,
  His brown hair lies close and even to his head, he strikes out with	  His brown hair lies close and even to his head, he strikes out with	  His brown hair lies close and even to his head, he strikes out with	  His brown hair lies close and even to his head, he strikes out with
      courageous arms, he urges himself with his legs,	      courageous arms, he urges himself with his legs,	      courageous arms, he urges himself with his legs,	      courageous arms, he urges himself with his legs,
  I see his white body, I see his undaunted eyes,	  I see his white body, I see his undaunted eyes,	  I see his white body, I see his undaunted eyes,	  I see his white body, I see his undaunted eyes,
  I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him head-foremost on	  I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him head-foremost on	  I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him head-foremost on	  I hate the swift-running eddies that would dash him head-foremost on
      the rocks.	      the rocks.	      the rocks.	      the rocks.
			
  What are you doing you ruffianly red-trickled waves?	  What are you doing you ruffianly red-trickled waves?	  What are you doing you ruffianly red-trickled waves?	  What are you doing you ruffianly red-trickled waves?
  Will you kill the courageous giant? will you kill him in the prime	  Will you kill the courageous giant? will you kill him in the prime	  Will you kill the courageous giant? will you kill him in the prime	  Will you kill the courageous giant? will you kill him in the prime
      of his middle age?	      of his middle age?	      of his middle age?	      of his middle age?
			
  Steady and long he struggles,	  Steady and long he struggles,	  Steady and long he struggles,	  Steady and long he struggles,
  He is baffled, bang'd, bruis'd, he holds out while his strength	  He is baffled, bang'd, bruis'd, he holds out while his strength	  He is baffled, bang'd, bruis'd, he holds out while his strength	  He is baffled, bang'd, bruis'd, he holds out while his strength
      holds out,	      holds out,	      holds out,	      holds out,
  The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood, they bear him away,	  The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood, they bear him away,	  The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood, they bear him away,	  The slapping eddies are spotted with his blood, they bear him away,
      they roll him, swing him, turn him,	      they roll him, swing him, turn him,	      they roll him, swing him, turn him,	      they roll him, swing him, turn him,
  His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies, it is	  His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies, it is	  His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies, it is	  His beautiful body is borne in the circling eddies, it is
      continually bruis'd on rocks,	      continually bruis'd on rocks,	      continually bruis'd on rocks,	      continually bruis'd on rocks,
  Swiftly and ought of sight is borne the brave corpse.	  Swiftly and ought of sight is borne the brave corpse.	  Swiftly and ought of sight is borne the brave corpse.	  Swiftly and ought of sight is borne the brave corpse.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  I turn but do not extricate myself,	  I turn but do not extricate myself,	  I turn but do not extricate myself,	  I turn but do not extricate myself,
  Confused, a past-reading, another, but with darkness yet.	  Confused, a past-reading, another, but with darkness yet.	  Confused, a past-reading, another, but with darkness yet.	  Confused, a past-reading, another, but with darkness yet.
			
  The beach is cut by the razory ice-wind, the wreck-guns sound,	  The beach is cut by the razory ice-wind, the wreck-guns sound,	  The beach is cut by the razory ice-wind, the wreck-guns sound,	  The beach is cut by the razory ice-wind, the wreck-guns sound,
  The tempest lulls, the moon comes floundering through the drifts.	  The tempest lulls, the moon comes floundering through the drifts.	  The tempest lulls, the moon comes floundering through the drifts.	  The tempest lulls, the moon comes floundering through the drifts.
			
  I look where the ship helplessly heads end on, I hear the burst as	  I look where the ship helplessly heads end on, I hear the burst as	  I look where the ship helplessly heads end on, I hear the burst as	  I look where the ship helplessly heads end on, I hear the burst as
      she strikes, I hear the howls of dismay, they grow fainter and fainter.	      she strikes, I hear the howls of dismay, they grow fainter and fainter.	      she strikes, I hear the howls of dismay, they grow fainter and fainter.	      she strikes, I hear the howls of dismay, they grow fainter and fainter.
			
  I cannot aid with my wringing fingers,	  I cannot aid with my wringing fingers,	  I cannot aid with my wringing fingers,	  I cannot aid with my wringing fingers,
  I can but rush to the surf and let it drench me and freeze upon me.	  I can but rush to the surf and let it drench me and freeze upon me.	  I can but rush to the surf and let it drench me and freeze upon me.	  I can but rush to the surf and let it drench me and freeze upon me.
			
  I search with the crowd, not one of the company is wash'd to us alive,	  I search with the crowd, not one of the company is wash'd to us alive,	  I search with the crowd, not one of the company is wash'd to us alive,	  I search with the crowd, not one of the company is wash'd to us alive,
  In the morning I help pick up the dead and lay them in rows in a barn.	  In the morning I help pick up the dead and lay them in rows in a barn.	  In the morning I help pick up the dead and lay them in rows in a barn.	  In the morning I help pick up the dead and lay them in rows in a barn.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Now of the older war-days, the defeat at Brooklyn,	  Now of the older war-days, the defeat at Brooklyn,	  Now of the older war-days, the defeat at Brooklyn,	  Now of the older war-days, the defeat at Brooklyn,
  Washington stands inside the lines, he stands on the intrench'd	  Washington stands inside the lines, he stands on the intrench'd	  Washington stands inside the lines, he stands on the intrench'd	  Washington stands inside the lines, he stands on the intrench'd
      hills amid a crowd of officers.	      hills amid a crowd of officers.	      hills amid a crowd of officers.	      hills amid a crowd of officers.
  His face is cold and damp, he cannot repress the weeping drops,	  His face is cold and damp, he cannot repress the weeping drops,	  His face is cold and damp, he cannot repress the weeping drops,	  His face is cold and damp, he cannot repress the weeping drops,
  He lifts the glass perpetually to his eyes, the color is blanch'd	  He lifts the glass perpetually to his eyes, the color is blanch'd	  He lifts the glass perpetually to his eyes, the color is blanch'd	  He lifts the glass perpetually to his eyes, the color is blanch'd
      from his cheeks,	      from his cheeks,	      from his cheeks,	      from his cheeks,
  He sees the slaughter of the southern braves confided to him by	  He sees the slaughter of the southern braves confided to him by	  He sees the slaughter of the southern braves confided to him by	  He sees the slaughter of the southern braves confided to him by
      their parents.	      their parents.	      their parents.	      their parents.
			
  The same at last and at last when peace is declared,	  The same at last and at last when peace is declared,	  The same at last and at last when peace is declared,	  The same at last and at last when peace is declared,
  He stands in the room of the old tavern, the well-belov'd soldiers	  He stands in the room of the old tavern, the well-belov'd soldiers	  He stands in the room of the old tavern, the well-belov'd soldiers	  He stands in the room of the old tavern, the well-belov'd soldiers
      all pass through,	      all pass through,	      all pass through,	      all pass through,
  The officers speechless and slow draw near in their turns,	  The officers speechless and slow draw near in their turns,	  The officers speechless and slow draw near in their turns,	  The officers speechless and slow draw near in their turns,
  The chief encircles their necks with his arm and kisses them on the cheek,	  The chief encircles their necks with his arm and kisses them on the cheek,	  The chief encircles their necks with his arm and kisses them on the cheek,	  The chief encircles their necks with his arm and kisses them on the cheek,
  He kisses lightly the wet cheeks one after another, he shakes hands	  He kisses lightly the wet cheeks one after another, he shakes hands	  He kisses lightly the wet cheeks one after another, he shakes hands	  He kisses lightly the wet cheeks one after another, he shakes hands
      and bids good-by to the army.	      and bids good-by to the army.	      and bids good-by to the army.	      and bids good-by to the army.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Now what my mother told me one day as we sat at dinner together,	  Now what my mother told me one day as we sat at dinner together,	  Now what my mother told me one day as we sat at dinner together,	  Now what my mother told me one day as we sat at dinner together,
  Of when she was a nearly grown girl living home with her parents on	  Of when she was a nearly grown girl living home with her parents on	  Of when she was a nearly grown girl living home with her parents on	  Of when she was a nearly grown girl living home with her parents on
      the old homestead.	      the old homestead.	      the old homestead.	      the old homestead.
			
  A red squaw came one breakfast-time to the old homestead,	  A red squaw came one breakfast-time to the old homestead,	  A red squaw came one breakfast-time to the old homestead,	  A red squaw came one breakfast-time to the old homestead,
  On her back she carried a bundle of rushes for rush-bottoming chairs,	  On her back she carried a bundle of rushes for rush-bottoming chairs,	  On her back she carried a bundle of rushes for rush-bottoming chairs,	  On her back she carried a bundle of rushes for rush-bottoming chairs,
  Her hair, straight, shiny, coarse, black, profuse, half-envelop'd	  Her hair, straight, shiny, coarse, black, profuse, half-envelop'd	  Her hair, straight, shiny, coarse, black, profuse, half-envelop'd	  Her hair, straight, shiny, coarse, black, profuse, half-envelop'd
      her face,	      her face,	      her face,	      her face,
  Her step was free and elastic, and her voice sounded exquisitely as	  Her step was free and elastic, and her voice sounded exquisitely as	  Her step was free and elastic, and her voice sounded exquisitely as	  Her step was free and elastic, and her voice sounded exquisitely as
      she spoke.	      she spoke.	      she spoke.	      she spoke.
			
  My mother look'd in delight and amazement at the stranger,	  My mother look'd in delight and amazement at the stranger,	  My mother look'd in delight and amazement at the stranger,	  My mother look'd in delight and amazement at the stranger,
  She look'd at the freshness of her tall-borne face and full and	  She look'd at the freshness of her tall-borne face and full and	  She look'd at the freshness of her tall-borne face and full and	  She look'd at the freshness of her tall-borne face and full and
      pliant limbs,	      pliant limbs,	      pliant limbs,	      pliant limbs,
  The more she look'd upon her she loved her,	  The more she look'd upon her she loved her,	  The more she look'd upon her she loved her,	  The more she look'd upon her she loved her,
  Never before had she seen such wonderful beauty and purity,	  Never before had she seen such wonderful beauty and purity,	  Never before had she seen such wonderful beauty and purity,	  Never before had she seen such wonderful beauty and purity,
  She made her sit on a bench by the jamb of the fireplace, she cook'd	  She made her sit on a bench by the jamb of the fireplace, she cook'd	  She made her sit on a bench by the jamb of the fireplace, she cook'd	  She made her sit on a bench by the jamb of the fireplace, she cook'd
      food for her,	      food for her,	      food for her,	      food for her,
  She had no work to give her, but she gave her remembrance and fondness.	  She had no work to give her, but she gave her remembrance and fondness.	  She had no work to give her, but she gave her remembrance and fondness.	  She had no work to give her, but she gave her remembrance and fondness.
			
  The red squaw staid all the forenoon, and toward the middle of the	  The red squaw staid all the forenoon, and toward the middle of the	  The red squaw staid all the forenoon, and toward the middle of the	  The red squaw staid all the forenoon, and toward the middle of the
      afternoon she went away,	      afternoon she went away,	      afternoon she went away,	      afternoon she went away,
  O my mother was loth to have her go away,	  O my mother was loth to have her go away,	  O my mother was loth to have her go away,	  O my mother was loth to have her go away,
  All the week she thought of her, she watch'd for her many a month,	  All the week she thought of her, she watch'd for her many a month,	  All the week she thought of her, she watch'd for her many a month,	  All the week she thought of her, she watch'd for her many a month,
  She remember'd her many a winter and many a summer,	  She remember'd her many a winter and many a summer,	  She remember'd her many a winter and many a summer,	  She remember'd her many a winter and many a summer,
  But the red squaw never came nor was heard of there again.	  But the red squaw never came nor was heard of there again.	  But the red squaw never came nor was heard of there again.	  But the red squaw never came nor was heard of there again.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  A show of the summer softness--a contact of something unseen--an	  A show of the summer softness--a contact of something unseen--an	  A show of the summer softness--a contact of something unseen--an	  A show of the summer softness--a contact of something unseen--an
      amour of the light and air,	      amour of the light and air,	      amour of the light and air,	      amour of the light and air,
  I am jealous and overwhelm'd with friendliness,	  I am jealous and overwhelm'd with friendliness,	  I am jealous and overwhelm'd with friendliness,	  I am jealous and overwhelm'd with friendliness,
  And will go gallivant with the light and air myself.	  And will go gallivant with the light and air myself.	  And will go gallivant with the light and air myself.	  And will go gallivant with the light and air myself.
			
  O love and summer, you are in the dreams and in me,	  O love and summer, you are in the dreams and in me,	  O love and summer, you are in the dreams and in me,	  O love and summer, you are in the dreams and in me,
  Autumn and winter are in the dreams, the farmer goes with his thrift,	  Autumn and winter are in the dreams, the farmer goes with his thrift,	  Autumn and winter are in the dreams, the farmer goes with his thrift,	  Autumn and winter are in the dreams, the farmer goes with his thrift,
  The droves and crops increase, the barns are well-fill'd.	  The droves and crops increase, the barns are well-fill'd.	  The droves and crops increase, the barns are well-fill'd.	  The droves and crops increase, the barns are well-fill'd.
			
  Elements merge in the night, ships make tacks in the dreams,	  Elements merge in the night, ships make tacks in the dreams,	  Elements merge in the night, ships make tacks in the dreams,	  Elements merge in the night, ships make tacks in the dreams,
  The sailor sails, the exile returns home,	  The sailor sails, the exile returns home,	  The sailor sails, the exile returns home,	  The sailor sails, the exile returns home,
  The fugitive returns unharm'd, the immigrant is back beyond months	  The fugitive returns unharm'd, the immigrant is back beyond months	  The fugitive returns unharm'd, the immigrant is back beyond months	  The fugitive returns unharm'd, the immigrant is back beyond months
      and years,	      and years,	      and years,	      and years,
  The poor Irishman lives in the simple house of his childhood with	  The poor Irishman lives in the simple house of his childhood with	  The poor Irishman lives in the simple house of his childhood with	  The poor Irishman lives in the simple house of his childhood with
      the well known neighbors and faces,	      the well known neighbors and faces,	      the well known neighbors and faces,	      the well known neighbors and faces,
  They warmly welcome him, he is barefoot again, he forgets he is well off,	  They warmly welcome him, he is barefoot again, he forgets he is well off,	  They warmly welcome him, he is barefoot again, he forgets he is well off,	  They warmly welcome him, he is barefoot again, he forgets he is well off,
  The Dutchman voyages home, and the Scotchman and Welshman voyage	  The Dutchman voyages home, and the Scotchman and Welshman voyage	  The Dutchman voyages home, and the Scotchman and Welshman voyage	  The Dutchman voyages home, and the Scotchman and Welshman voyage
      home, and the native of the Mediterranean voyages home,	      home, and the native of the Mediterranean voyages home,	      home, and the native of the Mediterranean voyages home,	      home, and the native of the Mediterranean voyages home,
  To every port of England, France, Spain, enter well-fill'd ships,	  To every port of England, France, Spain, enter well-fill'd ships,	  To every port of England, France, Spain, enter well-fill'd ships,	  To every port of England, France, Spain, enter well-fill'd ships,
  The Swiss foots it toward his hills, the Prussian goes his way, the	  The Swiss foots it toward his hills, the Prussian goes his way, the	  The Swiss foots it toward his hills, the Prussian goes his way, the	  The Swiss foots it toward his hills, the Prussian goes his way, the
      Hungarian his way, and the Pole his way,	      Hungarian his way, and the Pole his way,	      Hungarian his way, and the Pole his way,	      Hungarian his way, and the Pole his way,
  The Swede returns, and the Dane and Norwegian return.	  The Swede returns, and the Dane and Norwegian return.	  The Swede returns, and the Dane and Norwegian return.	  The Swede returns, and the Dane and Norwegian return.
			
  The homeward bound and the outward bound,	  The homeward bound and the outward bound,	  The homeward bound and the outward bound,	  The homeward bound and the outward bound,
  The beautiful lost swimmer, the ennuye, the onanist, the female that	  The beautiful lost swimmer, the ennuye, the onanist, the female that	  The beautiful lost swimmer, the ennuye, the onanist, the female that	  The beautiful lost swimmer, the ennuye, the onanist, the female that
      loves unrequited, the money-maker,	      loves unrequited, the money-maker,	      loves unrequited, the money-maker,	      loves unrequited, the money-maker,
  The actor and actress, those through with their parts and those	  The actor and actress, those through with their parts and those	  The actor and actress, those through with their parts and those	  The actor and actress, those through with their parts and those
      waiting to commence,	      waiting to commence,	      waiting to commence,	      waiting to commence,
  The affectionate boy, the husband and wife, the voter, the nominee	  The affectionate boy, the husband and wife, the voter, the nominee	  The affectionate boy, the husband and wife, the voter, the nominee	  The affectionate boy, the husband and wife, the voter, the nominee
      that is chosen and the nominee that has fail'd,	      that is chosen and the nominee that has fail'd,	      that is chosen and the nominee that has fail'd,	      that is chosen and the nominee that has fail'd,
  The great already known and the great any time after to-day,	  The great already known and the great any time after to-day,	  The great already known and the great any time after to-day,	  The great already known and the great any time after to-day,
  The stammerer, the sick, the perfect-form'd, the homely,	  The stammerer, the sick, the perfect-form'd, the homely,	  The stammerer, the sick, the perfect-form'd, the homely,	  The stammerer, the sick, the perfect-form'd, the homely,
  The criminal that stood in the box, the judge that sat and sentenced	  The criminal that stood in the box, the judge that sat and sentenced	  The criminal that stood in the box, the judge that sat and sentenced	  The criminal that stood in the box, the judge that sat and sentenced
      him, the fluent lawyers, the jury, the audience,	      him, the fluent lawyers, the jury, the audience,	      him, the fluent lawyers, the jury, the audience,	      him, the fluent lawyers, the jury, the audience,
  The laugher and weeper, the dancer, the midnight widow, the red squaw,	  The laugher and weeper, the dancer, the midnight widow, the red squaw,	  The laugher and weeper, the dancer, the midnight widow, the red squaw,	  The laugher and weeper, the dancer, the midnight widow, the red squaw,
  The consumptive, the erysipalite, the idiot, he that is wrong'd,	  The consumptive, the erysipalite, the idiot, he that is wrong'd,	  The consumptive, the erysipalite, the idiot, he that is wrong'd,	  The consumptive, the erysipalite, the idiot, he that is wrong'd,
  The antipodes, and every one between this and them in the dark,	  The antipodes, and every one between this and them in the dark,	  The antipodes, and every one between this and them in the dark,	  The antipodes, and every one between this and them in the dark,
  I swear they are averaged now--one is no better than the other,	  I swear they are averaged now--one is no better than the other,	  I swear they are averaged now--one is no better than the other,	  I swear they are averaged now--one is no better than the other,
  The night and sleep have liken'd them and restored them.	  The night and sleep have liken'd them and restored them.	  The night and sleep have liken'd them and restored them.	  The night and sleep have liken'd them and restored them.
			
  I swear they are all beautiful,	  I swear they are all beautiful,	  I swear they are all beautiful,	  I swear they are all beautiful,
  Every one that sleeps is beautiful, every thing in the dim light is	  Every one that sleeps is beautiful, every thing in the dim light is	  Every one that sleeps is beautiful, every thing in the dim light is	  Every one that sleeps is beautiful, every thing in the dim light is
      beautiful,	      beautiful,	      beautiful,	      beautiful,
  The wildest and bloodiest is over, and all is peace.	  The wildest and bloodiest is over, and all is peace.	  The wildest and bloodiest is over, and all is peace.	  The wildest and bloodiest is over, and all is peace.
			
  Peace is always beautiful,	  Peace is always beautiful,	  Peace is always beautiful,	  Peace is always beautiful,
  The myth of heaven indicates peace and night.	  The myth of heaven indicates peace and night.	  The myth of heaven indicates peace and night.	  The myth of heaven indicates peace and night.
			
  The myth of heaven indicates the soul,	  The myth of heaven indicates the soul,	  The myth of heaven indicates the soul,	  The myth of heaven indicates the soul,
  The soul is always beautiful, it appears more or it appears less, it	  The soul is always beautiful, it appears more or it appears less, it	  The soul is always beautiful, it appears more or it appears less, it	  The soul is always beautiful, it appears more or it appears less, it
      comes or it lags behind,	      comes or it lags behind,	      comes or it lags behind,	      comes or it lags behind,
  It comes from its embower'd garden and looks pleasantly on itself	  It comes from its embower'd garden and looks pleasantly on itself	  It comes from its embower'd garden and looks pleasantly on itself	  It comes from its embower'd garden and looks pleasantly on itself
      and encloses the world,	      and encloses the world,	      and encloses the world,	      and encloses the world,
  Perfect and clean the genitals previously jetting,and perfect and	  Perfect and clean the genitals previously jetting,and perfect and	  Perfect and clean the genitals previously jetting,and perfect and	  Perfect and clean the genitals previously jetting,and perfect and
      clean the womb cohering,	      clean the womb cohering,	      clean the womb cohering,	      clean the womb cohering,
  The head well-grown proportion'd and plumb, and the bowels and	  The head well-grown proportion'd and plumb, and the bowels and	  The head well-grown proportion'd and plumb, and the bowels and	  The head well-grown proportion'd and plumb, and the bowels and
      joints proportion'd and plumb.	      joints proportion'd and plumb.	      joints proportion'd and plumb.	      joints proportion'd and plumb.
			
  The soul is always beautiful,	  The soul is always beautiful,	  The soul is always beautiful,	  The soul is always beautiful,
  The universe is duly in order, every thing is in its place,	  The universe is duly in order, every thing is in its place,	  The universe is duly in order, every thing is in its place,	  The universe is duly in order, every thing is in its place,
  What has arrived is in its place and what waits shall be in its place,	  What has arrived is in its place and what waits shall be in its place,	  What has arrived is in its place and what waits shall be in its place,	  What has arrived is in its place and what waits shall be in its place,
  The twisted skull waits, the watery or rotten blood waits,	  The twisted skull waits, the watery or rotten blood waits,	  The twisted skull waits, the watery or rotten blood waits,	  The twisted skull waits, the watery or rotten blood waits,
  The child of the glutton or venerealee waits long, and the child of	  The child of the glutton or venerealee waits long, and the child of	  The child of the glutton or venerealee waits long, and the child of	  The child of the glutton or venerealee waits long, and the child of
      the drunkard waits long, and the drunkard himself waits long,	      the drunkard waits long, and the drunkard himself waits long,	      the drunkard waits long, and the drunkard himself waits long,	      the drunkard waits long, and the drunkard himself waits long,
  The sleepers that lived and died wait, the far advanced are to go on	  The sleepers that lived and died wait, the far advanced are to go on	  The sleepers that lived and died wait, the far advanced are to go on	  The sleepers that lived and died wait, the far advanced are to go on
      in their turns, and the far behind are to come on in their turns,	      in their turns, and the far behind are to come on in their turns,	      in their turns, and the far behind are to come on in their turns,	      in their turns, and the far behind are to come on in their turns,
  The diverse shall be no less diverse, but they shall flow and unite--	  The diverse shall be no less diverse, but they shall flow and unite--	  The diverse shall be no less diverse, but they shall flow and unite--	  The diverse shall be no less diverse, but they shall flow and unite--
      they unite now.	      they unite now.	      they unite now.	      they unite now.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  The sleepers are very beautiful as they lie unclothed,	  The sleepers are very beautiful as they lie unclothed,	  The sleepers are very beautiful as they lie unclothed,	  The sleepers are very beautiful as they lie unclothed,
  They flow hand in hand over the whole earth from east to west as	  They flow hand in hand over the whole earth from east to west as	  They flow hand in hand over the whole earth from east to west as	  They flow hand in hand over the whole earth from east to west as
      they lie unclothed,	      they lie unclothed,	      they lie unclothed,	      they lie unclothed,
  The Asiatic and African are hand in hand, the European and American	  The Asiatic and African are hand in hand, the European and American	  The Asiatic and African are hand in hand, the European and American	  The Asiatic and African are hand in hand, the European and American
      are hand in hand,	      are hand in hand,	      are hand in hand,	      are hand in hand,
  Learn'd and unlearn'd are hand in hand, and male and female are hand	  Learn'd and unlearn'd are hand in hand, and male and female are hand	  Learn'd and unlearn'd are hand in hand, and male and female are hand	  Learn'd and unlearn'd are hand in hand, and male and female are hand
      in hand,	      in hand,	      in hand,	      in hand,
  The bare arm of the girl crosses the bare breast of her lover, they	  The bare arm of the girl crosses the bare breast of her lover, they	  The bare arm of the girl crosses the bare breast of her lover, they	  The bare arm of the girl crosses the bare breast of her lover, they
      press close without lust, his lips press her neck,	      press close without lust, his lips press her neck,	      press close without lust, his lips press her neck,	      press close without lust, his lips press her neck,
  The father holds his grown or ungrown son in his arms with	  The father holds his grown or ungrown son in his arms with	  The father holds his grown or ungrown son in his arms with	  The father holds his grown or ungrown son in his arms with
      measureless love, and the son holds the father in his arms with	      measureless love, and the son holds the father in his arms with	      measureless love, and the son holds the father in his arms with	      measureless love, and the son holds the father in his arms with
      measureless love,	      measureless love,	      measureless love,	      measureless love,
  The white hair of the mother shines on the white wrist of the daughter,	  The white hair of the mother shines on the white wrist of the daughter,	  The white hair of the mother shines on the white wrist of the daughter,	  The white hair of the mother shines on the white wrist of the daughter,
  The breath of the boy goes with the breath of the man, friend is	  The breath of the boy goes with the breath of the man, friend is	  The breath of the boy goes with the breath of the man, friend is	  The breath of the boy goes with the breath of the man, friend is
      inarm'd by friend,	      inarm'd by friend,	      inarm'd by friend,	      inarm'd by friend,
  The scholar kisses the teacher and the teacher kisses the scholar,	  The scholar kisses the teacher and the teacher kisses the scholar,	  The scholar kisses the teacher and the teacher kisses the scholar,	  The scholar kisses the teacher and the teacher kisses the scholar,
      the wrong 'd made right,	      the wrong 'd made right,	      the wrong 'd made right,	      the wrong 'd made right,
  The call of the slave is one with the master's call, and the master	  The call of the slave is one with the master's call, and the master	  The call of the slave is one with the master's call, and the master	  The call of the slave is one with the master's call, and the master
      salutes the slave,	      salutes the slave,	      salutes the slave,	      salutes the slave,
  The felon steps forth from the prison, the insane becomes sane, the	  The felon steps forth from the prison, the insane becomes sane, the	  The felon steps forth from the prison, the insane becomes sane, the	  The felon steps forth from the prison, the insane becomes sane, the
      suffering of sick persons is reliev'd,	      suffering of sick persons is reliev'd,	      suffering of sick persons is reliev'd,	      suffering of sick persons is reliev'd,
  The sweatings and fevers stop, the throat that was unsound is sound,	  The sweatings and fevers stop, the throat that was unsound is sound,	  The sweatings and fevers stop, the throat that was unsound is sound,	  The sweatings and fevers stop, the throat that was unsound is sound,
      the lungs of the consumptive are resumed, the poor distress'd	      the lungs of the consumptive are resumed, the poor distress'd	      the lungs of the consumptive are resumed, the poor distress'd	      the lungs of the consumptive are resumed, the poor distress'd
      head is free,	      head is free,	      head is free,	      head is free,
  The joints of the rheumatic move as smoothly as ever, and smoother	  The joints of the rheumatic move as smoothly as ever, and smoother	  The joints of the rheumatic move as smoothly as ever, and smoother	  The joints of the rheumatic move as smoothly as ever, and smoother
      than ever,	      than ever,	      than ever,	      than ever,
  Stiflings and passages open, the paralyzed become supple,	  Stiflings and passages open, the paralyzed become supple,	  Stiflings and passages open, the paralyzed become supple,	  Stiflings and passages open, the paralyzed become supple,
  The swell'd and convuls'd and congested awake to themselves in condition,	  The swell'd and convuls'd and congested awake to themselves in condition,	  The swell'd and convuls'd and congested awake to themselves in condition,	  The swell'd and convuls'd and congested awake to themselves in condition,
  They pass the invigoration of the night and the chemistry of the	  They pass the invigoration of the night and the chemistry of the	  They pass the invigoration of the night and the chemistry of the	  They pass the invigoration of the night and the chemistry of the
      night, and awake.	      night, and awake.	      night, and awake.	      night, and awake.
			
  I too pass from the night,	  I too pass from the night,	  I too pass from the night,	  I too pass from the night,
  I stay a while away O night, but I return to you again and love you.	  I stay a while away O night, but I return to you again and love you.	  I stay a while away O night, but I return to you again and love you.	  I stay a while away O night, but I return to you again and love you.
			
  Why should I be afraid to trust myself to you?	  Why should I be afraid to trust myself to you?	  Why should I be afraid to trust myself to you?	  Why should I be afraid to trust myself to you?
  I am not afraid, I have been well brought forward by you,	  I am not afraid, I have been well brought forward by you,	  I am not afraid, I have been well brought forward by you,	  I am not afraid, I have been well brought forward by you,
  I love the rich running day, but I do not desert her in whom I lay so long,	  I love the rich running day, but I do not desert her in whom I lay so long,	  I love the rich running day, but I do not desert her in whom I lay so long,	  I love the rich running day, but I do not desert her in whom I lay so long,
  I know not how I came of you and I know not where I go with you, but	  I know not how I came of you and I know not where I go with you, but	  I know not how I came of you and I know not where I go with you, but	  I know not how I came of you and I know not where I go with you, but
      I know I came well and shall go well.	      I know I came well and shall go well.	      I know I came well and shall go well.	      I know I came well and shall go well.
			
  I will stop only a time with the night, and rise betimes,	  I will stop only a time with the night, and rise betimes,	  I will stop only a time with the night, and rise betimes,	  I will stop only a time with the night, and rise betimes,
  I will duly pass the day O my mother, and duly return to you.	  I will duly pass the day O my mother, and duly return to you.	  I will duly pass the day O my mother, and duly return to you.	  I will duly pass the day O my mother, and duly return to you.
			
			
			
			
Transpositions	Transpositions	Transpositions	Transpositions
			
  Let the reformers descend from the stands where they are forever	  Let the reformers descend from the stands where they are forever	  Let the reformers descend from the stands where they are forever	  Let the reformers descend from the stands where they are forever
      bawling--let an idiot or insane person appear on each of the stands;	      bawling--let an idiot or insane person appear on each of the stands;	      bawling--let an idiot or insane person appear on each of the stands;	      bawling--let an idiot or insane person appear on each of the stands;
  Let judges and criminals be transposed--let the prison-keepers be	  Let judges and criminals be transposed--let the prison-keepers be	  Let judges and criminals be transposed--let the prison-keepers be	  Let judges and criminals be transposed--let the prison-keepers be
      put in prison--let those that were prisoners take the keys;	      put in prison--let those that were prisoners take the keys;	      put in prison--let those that were prisoners take the keys;	      put in prison--let those that were prisoners take the keys;
  Let them that distrust birth and death lead the rest.	  Let them that distrust birth and death lead the rest.	  Let them that distrust birth and death lead the rest.	  Let them that distrust birth and death lead the rest.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXIX	BOOK XXIX	BOOK XXIX	BOOK XXIX
			
			
To Think of Time	To Think of Time	To Think of Time	To Think of Time
			
      1	      1	      1	      1
  To think of time--of all that retrospection,	  To think of time--of all that retrospection,	  To think of time--of all that retrospection,	  To think of time--of all that retrospection,
  To think of to-day, and the ages continued henceforward.	  To think of to-day, and the ages continued henceforward.	  To think of to-day, and the ages continued henceforward.	  To think of to-day, and the ages continued henceforward.
			
  Have you guess'd you yourself would not continue?	  Have you guess'd you yourself would not continue?	  Have you guess'd you yourself would not continue?	  Have you guess'd you yourself would not continue?
  Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?	  Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?	  Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?	  Have you dreaded these earth-beetles?
  Have you fear'd the future would be nothing to you?	  Have you fear'd the future would be nothing to you?	  Have you fear'd the future would be nothing to you?	  Have you fear'd the future would be nothing to you?
			
  Is to-day nothing? is the beginningless past nothing?	  Is to-day nothing? is the beginningless past nothing?	  Is to-day nothing? is the beginningless past nothing?	  Is to-day nothing? is the beginningless past nothing?
  If the future is nothing they are just as surely nothing.	  If the future is nothing they are just as surely nothing.	  If the future is nothing they are just as surely nothing.	  If the future is nothing they are just as surely nothing.
			
  To think that the sun rose in the east--that men and women were	  To think that the sun rose in the east--that men and women were	  To think that the sun rose in the east--that men and women were	  To think that the sun rose in the east--that men and women were
      flexible, real, alive--that every thing was alive,	      flexible, real, alive--that every thing was alive,	      flexible, real, alive--that every thing was alive,	      flexible, real, alive--that every thing was alive,
  To think that you and I did not see, feel, think, nor bear our part,	  To think that you and I did not see, feel, think, nor bear our part,	  To think that you and I did not see, feel, think, nor bear our part,	  To think that you and I did not see, feel, think, nor bear our part,
  To think that we are now here and bear our part.	  To think that we are now here and bear our part.	  To think that we are now here and bear our part.	  To think that we are now here and bear our part.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without an accouchement,	  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without an accouchement,	  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without an accouchement,	  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without an accouchement,
  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without a corpse.	  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without a corpse.	  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without a corpse.	  Not a day passes, not a minute or second without a corpse.
			
  The dull nights go over and the dull days also,	  The dull nights go over and the dull days also,	  The dull nights go over and the dull days also,	  The dull nights go over and the dull days also,
  The soreness of lying so much in bed goes over,	  The soreness of lying so much in bed goes over,	  The soreness of lying so much in bed goes over,	  The soreness of lying so much in bed goes over,
  The physician after long putting off gives the silent and terrible	  The physician after long putting off gives the silent and terrible	  The physician after long putting off gives the silent and terrible	  The physician after long putting off gives the silent and terrible
      look for an answer,	      look for an answer,	      look for an answer,	      look for an answer,
  The children come hurried and weeping, and the brothers and sisters	  The children come hurried and weeping, and the brothers and sisters	  The children come hurried and weeping, and the brothers and sisters	  The children come hurried and weeping, and the brothers and sisters
      are sent for,	      are sent for,	      are sent for,	      are sent for,
  Medicines stand unused on the shelf, (the camphor-smell has long	  Medicines stand unused on the shelf, (the camphor-smell has long	  Medicines stand unused on the shelf, (the camphor-smell has long	  Medicines stand unused on the shelf, (the camphor-smell has long
      pervaded the rooms,)	      pervaded the rooms,)	      pervaded the rooms,)	      pervaded the rooms,)
  The faithful hand of the living does not desert the hand of the dying,	  The faithful hand of the living does not desert the hand of the dying,	  The faithful hand of the living does not desert the hand of the dying,	  The faithful hand of the living does not desert the hand of the dying,
  The twitching lips press lightly on the forehead of the dying,	  The twitching lips press lightly on the forehead of the dying,	  The twitching lips press lightly on the forehead of the dying,	  The twitching lips press lightly on the forehead of the dying,
  The breath ceases and the pulse of the heart ceases,	  The breath ceases and the pulse of the heart ceases,	  The breath ceases and the pulse of the heart ceases,	  The breath ceases and the pulse of the heart ceases,
  The corpse stretches on the bed and the living look upon it,	  The corpse stretches on the bed and the living look upon it,	  The corpse stretches on the bed and the living look upon it,	  The corpse stretches on the bed and the living look upon it,
  It is palpable as the living are palpable.	  It is palpable as the living are palpable.	  It is palpable as the living are palpable.	  It is palpable as the living are palpable.
			
  The living look upon the corpse with their eyesight,	  The living look upon the corpse with their eyesight,	  The living look upon the corpse with their eyesight,	  The living look upon the corpse with their eyesight,
  But without eyesight lingers a different living and looks curiously	  But without eyesight lingers a different living and looks curiously	  But without eyesight lingers a different living and looks curiously	  But without eyesight lingers a different living and looks curiously
      on the corpse.	      on the corpse.	      on the corpse.	      on the corpse.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  To think the thought of death merged in the thought of materials,	  To think the thought of death merged in the thought of materials,	  To think the thought of death merged in the thought of materials,	  To think the thought of death merged in the thought of materials,
  To think of all these wonders of city and country, and others taking	  To think of all these wonders of city and country, and others taking	  To think of all these wonders of city and country, and others taking	  To think of all these wonders of city and country, and others taking
      great interest in them, and we taking no interest in them.	      great interest in them, and we taking no interest in them.	      great interest in them, and we taking no interest in them.	      great interest in them, and we taking no interest in them.
			
  To think how eager we are in building our houses,	  To think how eager we are in building our houses,	  To think how eager we are in building our houses,	  To think how eager we are in building our houses,
  To think others shall be just as eager, and we quite indifferent.	  To think others shall be just as eager, and we quite indifferent.	  To think others shall be just as eager, and we quite indifferent.	  To think others shall be just as eager, and we quite indifferent.
			
  (I see one building the house that serves him a few years, or	  (I see one building the house that serves him a few years, or	  (I see one building the house that serves him a few years, or	  (I see one building the house that serves him a few years, or
      seventy or eighty years at most,	      seventy or eighty years at most,	      seventy or eighty years at most,	      seventy or eighty years at most,
  I see one building the house that serves him longer than that.)	  I see one building the house that serves him longer than that.)	  I see one building the house that serves him longer than that.)	  I see one building the house that serves him longer than that.)
			
  Slow-moving and black lines creep over the whole earth--they never	  Slow-moving and black lines creep over the whole earth--they never	  Slow-moving and black lines creep over the whole earth--they never	  Slow-moving and black lines creep over the whole earth--they never
      cease--they are the burial lines,	      cease--they are the burial lines,	      cease--they are the burial lines,	      cease--they are the burial lines,
  He that was President was buried, and he that is now President shall	  He that was President was buried, and he that is now President shall	  He that was President was buried, and he that is now President shall	  He that was President was buried, and he that is now President shall
      surely be buried.	      surely be buried.	      surely be buried.	      surely be buried.
			
			
      4	      4	      4	      4
  A reminiscence of the vulgar fate,	  A reminiscence of the vulgar fate,	  A reminiscence of the vulgar fate,	  A reminiscence of the vulgar fate,
  A frequent sample of the life and death of workmen,	  A frequent sample of the life and death of workmen,	  A frequent sample of the life and death of workmen,	  A frequent sample of the life and death of workmen,
  Each after his kind.	  Each after his kind.	  Each after his kind.	  Each after his kind.
			
  Cold dash of waves at the ferry-wharf, posh and ice in the river,	  Cold dash of waves at the ferry-wharf, posh and ice in the river,	  Cold dash of waves at the ferry-wharf, posh and ice in the river,	  Cold dash of waves at the ferry-wharf, posh and ice in the river,
      half-frozen mud in the streets,	      half-frozen mud in the streets,	      half-frozen mud in the streets,	      half-frozen mud in the streets,
  A gray discouraged sky overhead, the short last daylight of December,	  A gray discouraged sky overhead, the short last daylight of December,	  A gray discouraged sky overhead, the short last daylight of December,	  A gray discouraged sky overhead, the short last daylight of December,
  A hearse and stages, the funeral of an old Broadway stage-driver,	  A hearse and stages, the funeral of an old Broadway stage-driver,	  A hearse and stages, the funeral of an old Broadway stage-driver,	  A hearse and stages, the funeral of an old Broadway stage-driver,
      the cortege mostly drivers.	      the cortege mostly drivers.	      the cortege mostly drivers.	      the cortege mostly drivers.
			
  Steady the trot to the cemetery, duly rattles the death-bell,	  Steady the trot to the cemetery, duly rattles the death-bell,	  Steady the trot to the cemetery, duly rattles the death-bell,	  Steady the trot to the cemetery, duly rattles the death-bell,
  The gate is pass'd, the new-dug grave is halted at, the living	  The gate is pass'd, the new-dug grave is halted at, the living	  The gate is pass'd, the new-dug grave is halted at, the living	  The gate is pass'd, the new-dug grave is halted at, the living
      alight, the hearse uncloses,	      alight, the hearse uncloses,	      alight, the hearse uncloses,	      alight, the hearse uncloses,
  The coffin is pass'd out, lower'd and settled, the whip is laid on	  The coffin is pass'd out, lower'd and settled, the whip is laid on	  The coffin is pass'd out, lower'd and settled, the whip is laid on	  The coffin is pass'd out, lower'd and settled, the whip is laid on
      the coffin, the earth is swiftly shovel'd in,	      the coffin, the earth is swiftly shovel'd in,	      the coffin, the earth is swiftly shovel'd in,	      the coffin, the earth is swiftly shovel'd in,
  The mound above is flatted with the spades--silence,	  The mound above is flatted with the spades--silence,	  The mound above is flatted with the spades--silence,	  The mound above is flatted with the spades--silence,
  A minute--no one moves or speaks--it is done,	  A minute--no one moves or speaks--it is done,	  A minute--no one moves or speaks--it is done,	  A minute--no one moves or speaks--it is done,
  He is decently put away--is there any thing more?	  He is decently put away--is there any thing more?	  He is decently put away--is there any thing more?	  He is decently put away--is there any thing more?
			
  He was a good fellow, free-mouth'd, quick-temper'd, not bad-looking,	  He was a good fellow, free-mouth'd, quick-temper'd, not bad-looking,	  He was a good fellow, free-mouth'd, quick-temper'd, not bad-looking,	  He was a good fellow, free-mouth'd, quick-temper'd, not bad-looking,
  Ready with life or death for a friend, fond of women, gambled, ate	  Ready with life or death for a friend, fond of women, gambled, ate	  Ready with life or death for a friend, fond of women, gambled, ate	  Ready with life or death for a friend, fond of women, gambled, ate
      hearty, drank hearty,	      hearty, drank hearty,	      hearty, drank hearty,	      hearty, drank hearty,
  Had known what it was to be flush, grew low-spirited toward the	  Had known what it was to be flush, grew low-spirited toward the	  Had known what it was to be flush, grew low-spirited toward the	  Had known what it was to be flush, grew low-spirited toward the
      last, sicken'd, was help'd by a contribution,	      last, sicken'd, was help'd by a contribution,	      last, sicken'd, was help'd by a contribution,	      last, sicken'd, was help'd by a contribution,
  Died, aged forty-one years--and that was his funeral.	  Died, aged forty-one years--and that was his funeral.	  Died, aged forty-one years--and that was his funeral.	  Died, aged forty-one years--and that was his funeral.
			
  Thumb extended, finger uplifted, apron, cape, gloves, strap,	  Thumb extended, finger uplifted, apron, cape, gloves, strap,	  Thumb extended, finger uplifted, apron, cape, gloves, strap,	  Thumb extended, finger uplifted, apron, cape, gloves, strap,
      wet-weather clothes, whip carefully chosen,	      wet-weather clothes, whip carefully chosen,	      wet-weather clothes, whip carefully chosen,	      wet-weather clothes, whip carefully chosen,
  Boss, spotter, starter, hostler, somebody loafing on you, you	  Boss, spotter, starter, hostler, somebody loafing on you, you	  Boss, spotter, starter, hostler, somebody loafing on you, you	  Boss, spotter, starter, hostler, somebody loafing on you, you
      loafing on somebody, headway, man before and man behind,	      loafing on somebody, headway, man before and man behind,	      loafing on somebody, headway, man before and man behind,	      loafing on somebody, headway, man before and man behind,
  Good day's work, bad day's work, pet stock, mean stock, first out,	  Good day's work, bad day's work, pet stock, mean stock, first out,	  Good day's work, bad day's work, pet stock, mean stock, first out,	  Good day's work, bad day's work, pet stock, mean stock, first out,
      last out, turning-in at night,	      last out, turning-in at night,	      last out, turning-in at night,	      last out, turning-in at night,
  To think that these are so much and so nigh to other drivers, and he	  To think that these are so much and so nigh to other drivers, and he	  To think that these are so much and so nigh to other drivers, and he	  To think that these are so much and so nigh to other drivers, and he
      there takes no interest in them.	      there takes no interest in them.	      there takes no interest in them.	      there takes no interest in them.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  The markets, the government, the working-man's wages, to think what	  The markets, the government, the working-man's wages, to think what	  The markets, the government, the working-man's wages, to think what	  The markets, the government, the working-man's wages, to think what
      account they are through our nights and days,	      account they are through our nights and days,	      account they are through our nights and days,	      account they are through our nights and days,
  To think that other working-men will make just as great account of	  To think that other working-men will make just as great account of	  To think that other working-men will make just as great account of	  To think that other working-men will make just as great account of
      them, yet we make little or no account.	      them, yet we make little or no account.	      them, yet we make little or no account.	      them, yet we make little or no account.
			
  The vulgar and the refined, what you call sin and what you call	  The vulgar and the refined, what you call sin and what you call	  The vulgar and the refined, what you call sin and what you call	  The vulgar and the refined, what you call sin and what you call
      goodness, to think how wide a difference,	      goodness, to think how wide a difference,	      goodness, to think how wide a difference,	      goodness, to think how wide a difference,
  To think the difference will still continue to others, yet we lie	  To think the difference will still continue to others, yet we lie	  To think the difference will still continue to others, yet we lie	  To think the difference will still continue to others, yet we lie
      beyond the difference.	      beyond the difference.	      beyond the difference.	      beyond the difference.
			
  To think how much pleasure there is,	  To think how much pleasure there is,	  To think how much pleasure there is,	  To think how much pleasure there is,
  Do you enjoy yourself in the city? or engaged in business? or	  Do you enjoy yourself in the city? or engaged in business? or	  Do you enjoy yourself in the city? or engaged in business? or	  Do you enjoy yourself in the city? or engaged in business? or
      planning a nomination and election? or with your wife and family?	      planning a nomination and election? or with your wife and family?	      planning a nomination and election? or with your wife and family?	      planning a nomination and election? or with your wife and family?
  Or with your mother and sisters? or in womanly housework? or the	  Or with your mother and sisters? or in womanly housework? or the	  Or with your mother and sisters? or in womanly housework? or the	  Or with your mother and sisters? or in womanly housework? or the
      beautiful maternal cares?	      beautiful maternal cares?	      beautiful maternal cares?	      beautiful maternal cares?
  These also flow onward to others, you and I flow onward,	  These also flow onward to others, you and I flow onward,	  These also flow onward to others, you and I flow onward,	  These also flow onward to others, you and I flow onward,
  But in due time you and I shall take less interest in them.	  But in due time you and I shall take less interest in them.	  But in due time you and I shall take less interest in them.	  But in due time you and I shall take less interest in them.
			
  Your farm, profits, crops--to think how engross'd you are,	  Your farm, profits, crops--to think how engross'd you are,	  Your farm, profits, crops--to think how engross'd you are,	  Your farm, profits, crops--to think how engross'd you are,
  To think there will still be farms, profits, crops, yet for you of	  To think there will still be farms, profits, crops, yet for you of	  To think there will still be farms, profits, crops, yet for you of	  To think there will still be farms, profits, crops, yet for you of
      what avail?	      what avail?	      what avail?	      what avail?
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  What will be will be well, for what is is well,	  What will be will be well, for what is is well,	  What will be will be well, for what is is well,	  What will be will be well, for what is is well,
  To take interest is well, and not to take interest shall be well.	  To take interest is well, and not to take interest shall be well.	  To take interest is well, and not to take interest shall be well.	  To take interest is well, and not to take interest shall be well.
			
  The domestic joys, the dally housework or business, the building of	  The domestic joys, the dally housework or business, the building of	  The domestic joys, the dally housework or business, the building of	  The domestic joys, the dally housework or business, the building of
      houses, are not phantasms, they have weight, form, location,	      houses, are not phantasms, they have weight, form, location,	      houses, are not phantasms, they have weight, form, location,	      houses, are not phantasms, they have weight, form, location,
  Farms, profits, crops, markets, wages, government, are none of them	  Farms, profits, crops, markets, wages, government, are none of them	  Farms, profits, crops, markets, wages, government, are none of them	  Farms, profits, crops, markets, wages, government, are none of them
      phantasms,	      phantasms,	      phantasms,	      phantasms,
  The difference between sin and goodness is no delusion,	  The difference between sin and goodness is no delusion,	  The difference between sin and goodness is no delusion,	  The difference between sin and goodness is no delusion,
  The earth is not an echo, man and his life and all the things of his	  The earth is not an echo, man and his life and all the things of his	  The earth is not an echo, man and his life and all the things of his	  The earth is not an echo, man and his life and all the things of his
      life are well-consider'd.	      life are well-consider'd.	      life are well-consider'd.	      life are well-consider'd.
			
  You are not thrown to the winds, you gather certainly and safely	  You are not thrown to the winds, you gather certainly and safely	  You are not thrown to the winds, you gather certainly and safely	  You are not thrown to the winds, you gather certainly and safely
      around yourself,	      around yourself,	      around yourself,	      around yourself,
  Yourself! yourself!. yourself, for ever and ever!	  Yourself! yourself!. yourself, for ever and ever!	  Yourself! yourself!. yourself, for ever and ever!	  Yourself! yourself!. yourself, for ever and ever!
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  It is not to diffuse you that you were born of your mother and	  It is not to diffuse you that you were born of your mother and	  It is not to diffuse you that you were born of your mother and	  It is not to diffuse you that you were born of your mother and
      father, it is to identify you,	      father, it is to identify you,	      father, it is to identify you,	      father, it is to identify you,
  It is not that you should be undecided, but that you should be decided,	  It is not that you should be undecided, but that you should be decided,	  It is not that you should be undecided, but that you should be decided,	  It is not that you should be undecided, but that you should be decided,
  Something long preparing and formless is arrived and form'd in you,	  Something long preparing and formless is arrived and form'd in you,	  Something long preparing and formless is arrived and form'd in you,	  Something long preparing and formless is arrived and form'd in you,
  You are henceforth secure, whatever comes or goes.	  You are henceforth secure, whatever comes or goes.	  You are henceforth secure, whatever comes or goes.	  You are henceforth secure, whatever comes or goes.
			
  The threads that were spun are gather'd, the wet crosses the warp,	  The threads that were spun are gather'd, the wet crosses the warp,	  The threads that were spun are gather'd, the wet crosses the warp,	  The threads that were spun are gather'd, the wet crosses the warp,
      the pattern is systematic.	      the pattern is systematic.	      the pattern is systematic.	      the pattern is systematic.
			
  The preparations have every one been justified,	  The preparations have every one been justified,	  The preparations have every one been justified,	  The preparations have every one been justified,
  The orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instruments, the baton	  The orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instruments, the baton	  The orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instruments, the baton	  The orchestra have sufficiently tuned their instruments, the baton
      has given the signal.	      has given the signal.	      has given the signal.	      has given the signal.
			
  The guest that was coming, he waited long, he is now housed,	  The guest that was coming, he waited long, he is now housed,	  The guest that was coming, he waited long, he is now housed,	  The guest that was coming, he waited long, he is now housed,
  He is one of those who are beautiful and happy, he is one of those	  He is one of those who are beautiful and happy, he is one of those	  He is one of those who are beautiful and happy, he is one of those	  He is one of those who are beautiful and happy, he is one of those
      that to look upon and be with is enough.	      that to look upon and be with is enough.	      that to look upon and be with is enough.	      that to look upon and be with is enough.
			
  The law of the past cannot be eluded,	  The law of the past cannot be eluded,	  The law of the past cannot be eluded,	  The law of the past cannot be eluded,
  The law of the present and future cannot be eluded,	  The law of the present and future cannot be eluded,	  The law of the present and future cannot be eluded,	  The law of the present and future cannot be eluded,
  The law of the living cannot be eluded, it is eternal,	  The law of the living cannot be eluded, it is eternal,	  The law of the living cannot be eluded, it is eternal,	  The law of the living cannot be eluded, it is eternal,
  The law of promotion and transformation cannot be eluded,	  The law of promotion and transformation cannot be eluded,	  The law of promotion and transformation cannot be eluded,	  The law of promotion and transformation cannot be eluded,
  The law of heroes and good-doers cannot be eluded,	  The law of heroes and good-doers cannot be eluded,	  The law of heroes and good-doers cannot be eluded,	  The law of heroes and good-doers cannot be eluded,
  The law of drunkards, informers, mean persons, not one iota thereof	  The law of drunkards, informers, mean persons, not one iota thereof	  The law of drunkards, informers, mean persons, not one iota thereof	  The law of drunkards, informers, mean persons, not one iota thereof
      can be eluded.	      can be eluded.	      can be eluded.	      can be eluded.
			
       8	       8	       8	       8
  Slow moving and black lines go ceaselessly over the earth,	  Slow moving and black lines go ceaselessly over the earth,	  Slow moving and black lines go ceaselessly over the earth,	  Slow moving and black lines go ceaselessly over the earth,
  Northerner goes carried and Southerner goes carried, and they on the	  Northerner goes carried and Southerner goes carried, and they on the	  Northerner goes carried and Southerner goes carried, and they on the	  Northerner goes carried and Southerner goes carried, and they on the
      Atlantic side and they on the Pacific,	      Atlantic side and they on the Pacific,	      Atlantic side and they on the Pacific,	      Atlantic side and they on the Pacific,
  And they between, and all through the Mississippi country, and all	  And they between, and all through the Mississippi country, and all	  And they between, and all through the Mississippi country, and all	  And they between, and all through the Mississippi country, and all
      over the earth.	      over the earth.	      over the earth.	      over the earth.
			
  The great masters and kosmos are well as they go, the heroes and	  The great masters and kosmos are well as they go, the heroes and	  The great masters and kosmos are well as they go, the heroes and	  The great masters and kosmos are well as they go, the heroes and
      good-doers are well,	      good-doers are well,	      good-doers are well,	      good-doers are well,
  The known leaders and inventors and the rich owners and pious and	  The known leaders and inventors and the rich owners and pious and	  The known leaders and inventors and the rich owners and pious and	  The known leaders and inventors and the rich owners and pious and
      distinguish'd may be well,	      distinguish'd may be well,	      distinguish'd may be well,	      distinguish'd may be well,
  But there is more account than that, there is strict account of all.	  But there is more account than that, there is strict account of all.	  But there is more account than that, there is strict account of all.	  But there is more account than that, there is strict account of all.
			
  The interminable hordes of the ignorant and wicked are not nothing,	  The interminable hordes of the ignorant and wicked are not nothing,	  The interminable hordes of the ignorant and wicked are not nothing,	  The interminable hordes of the ignorant and wicked are not nothing,
  The barbarians of Africa and Asia are not nothing,	  The barbarians of Africa and Asia are not nothing,	  The barbarians of Africa and Asia are not nothing,	  The barbarians of Africa and Asia are not nothing,
  The perpetual successions of shallow people are not nothing as they go.	  The perpetual successions of shallow people are not nothing as they go.	  The perpetual successions of shallow people are not nothing as they go.	  The perpetual successions of shallow people are not nothing as they go.
			
  Of and in all these things,	  Of and in all these things,	  Of and in all these things,	  Of and in all these things,
  I have dream'd that we are not to be changed so much, nor the law of	  I have dream'd that we are not to be changed so much, nor the law of	  I have dream'd that we are not to be changed so much, nor the law of	  I have dream'd that we are not to be changed so much, nor the law of
      us changed,	      us changed,	      us changed,	      us changed,
  I have dream'd that heroes and good-doers shall be under the present	  I have dream'd that heroes and good-doers shall be under the present	  I have dream'd that heroes and good-doers shall be under the present	  I have dream'd that heroes and good-doers shall be under the present
      and past law,	      and past law,	      and past law,	      and past law,
  And that murderers, drunkards, liars, shall be under the present and	  And that murderers, drunkards, liars, shall be under the present and	  And that murderers, drunkards, liars, shall be under the present and	  And that murderers, drunkards, liars, shall be under the present and
      past law,	      past law,	      past law,	      past law,
  For I have dream'd that the law they are under now is enough.	  For I have dream'd that the law they are under now is enough.	  For I have dream'd that the law they are under now is enough.	  For I have dream'd that the law they are under now is enough.
			
  And I have dream'd that the purpose and essence of the known life,	  And I have dream'd that the purpose and essence of the known life,	  And I have dream'd that the purpose and essence of the known life,	  And I have dream'd that the purpose and essence of the known life,
      the transient,	      the transient,	      the transient,	      the transient,
  Is to form and decide identity for the unknown life, the permanent.	  Is to form and decide identity for the unknown life, the permanent.	  Is to form and decide identity for the unknown life, the permanent.	  Is to form and decide identity for the unknown life, the permanent.
			
  If all came but to ashes of dung,	  If all came but to ashes of dung,	  If all came but to ashes of dung,	  If all came but to ashes of dung,
  If maggots and rats ended us, then Alarum! for we are betray'd,	  If maggots and rats ended us, then Alarum! for we are betray'd,	  If maggots and rats ended us, then Alarum! for we are betray'd,	  If maggots and rats ended us, then Alarum! for we are betray'd,
  Then indeed suspicion of death.	  Then indeed suspicion of death.	  Then indeed suspicion of death.	  Then indeed suspicion of death.
			
  Do you suspect death? if I were to suspect death I should die now,	  Do you suspect death? if I were to suspect death I should die now,	  Do you suspect death? if I were to suspect death I should die now,	  Do you suspect death? if I were to suspect death I should die now,
  Do you think I could walk pleasantly and well-suited toward annihilation?	  Do you think I could walk pleasantly and well-suited toward annihilation?	  Do you think I could walk pleasantly and well-suited toward annihilation?	  Do you think I could walk pleasantly and well-suited toward annihilation?
			
  Pleasantly and well-suited I walk,	  Pleasantly and well-suited I walk,	  Pleasantly and well-suited I walk,	  Pleasantly and well-suited I walk,
  Whither I walk I cannot define, but I know it is good,	  Whither I walk I cannot define, but I know it is good,	  Whither I walk I cannot define, but I know it is good,	  Whither I walk I cannot define, but I know it is good,
  The whole universe indicates that it is good,	  The whole universe indicates that it is good,	  The whole universe indicates that it is good,	  The whole universe indicates that it is good,
  The past and the present indicate that it is good.	  The past and the present indicate that it is good.	  The past and the present indicate that it is good.	  The past and the present indicate that it is good.
			
  How beautiful and perfect are the animals!	  How beautiful and perfect are the animals!	  How beautiful and perfect are the animals!	  How beautiful and perfect are the animals!
  How perfect the earth, and the minutest thing upon it!	  How perfect the earth, and the minutest thing upon it!	  How perfect the earth, and the minutest thing upon it!	  How perfect the earth, and the minutest thing upon it!
  What is called good is perfect, and what is called bad is just as perfect,	  What is called good is perfect, and what is called bad is just as perfect,	  What is called good is perfect, and what is called bad is just as perfect,	  What is called good is perfect, and what is called bad is just as perfect,
  The vegetables and minerals are all perfect, and the imponderable	  The vegetables and minerals are all perfect, and the imponderable	  The vegetables and minerals are all perfect, and the imponderable	  The vegetables and minerals are all perfect, and the imponderable
      fluids perfect;	      fluids perfect;	      fluids perfect;	      fluids perfect;
  Slowly and surely they have pass'd on to this, and slowly and surely	  Slowly and surely they have pass'd on to this, and slowly and surely	  Slowly and surely they have pass'd on to this, and slowly and surely	  Slowly and surely they have pass'd on to this, and slowly and surely
      they yet pass on.	      they yet pass on.	      they yet pass on.	      they yet pass on.
			
       9	       9	       9	       9
  I swear I think now that every thing without exception has an eternal soul!	  I swear I think now that every thing without exception has an eternal soul!	  I swear I think now that every thing without exception has an eternal soul!	  I swear I think now that every thing without exception has an eternal soul!
  The trees have, rooted in the ground! the weeds of the sea have! the	  The trees have, rooted in the ground! the weeds of the sea have! the	  The trees have, rooted in the ground! the weeds of the sea have! the	  The trees have, rooted in the ground! the weeds of the sea have! the
      animals!	      animals!	      animals!	      animals!
			
  I swear I think there is nothing but immortality!	  I swear I think there is nothing but immortality!	  I swear I think there is nothing but immortality!	  I swear I think there is nothing but immortality!
  That the exquisite scheme is for it, and the nebulous float is for	  That the exquisite scheme is for it, and the nebulous float is for	  That the exquisite scheme is for it, and the nebulous float is for	  That the exquisite scheme is for it, and the nebulous float is for
      it, and the cohering is for it!	      it, and the cohering is for it!	      it, and the cohering is for it!	      it, and the cohering is for it!
  And all preparation is for it--and identity is for it--and life and	  And all preparation is for it--and identity is for it--and life and	  And all preparation is for it--and identity is for it--and life and	  And all preparation is for it--and identity is for it--and life and
      materials are altogether for it!	      materials are altogether for it!	      materials are altogether for it!	      materials are altogether for it!
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXX.  WHISPERS OF HEAVENLY DEATH	BOOK XXX.  WHISPERS OF HEAVENLY DEATH	BOOK XXX.  WHISPERS OF HEAVENLY DEATH	BOOK XXX.  WHISPERS OF HEAVENLY DEATH
			
			
Darest Thou Now O Soul	Darest Thou Now O Soul	Darest Thou Now O Soul	Darest Thou Now O Soul
			
  Darest thou now O soul,	  Darest thou now O soul,	  Darest thou now O soul,	  Darest thou now O soul,
  Walk out with me toward the unknown region,	  Walk out with me toward the unknown region,	  Walk out with me toward the unknown region,	  Walk out with me toward the unknown region,
  Where neither ground is for the feet nor any path to follow?	  Where neither ground is for the feet nor any path to follow?	  Where neither ground is for the feet nor any path to follow?	  Where neither ground is for the feet nor any path to follow?
			
  No map there, nor guide,	  No map there, nor guide,	  No map there, nor guide,	  No map there, nor guide,
  Nor voice sounding, nor touch of human hand,	  Nor voice sounding, nor touch of human hand,	  Nor voice sounding, nor touch of human hand,	  Nor voice sounding, nor touch of human hand,
  Nor face with blooming flesh, nor lips, nor eyes, are in that land.	  Nor face with blooming flesh, nor lips, nor eyes, are in that land.	  Nor face with blooming flesh, nor lips, nor eyes, are in that land.	  Nor face with blooming flesh, nor lips, nor eyes, are in that land.
			
  I know it not O soul,	  I know it not O soul,	  I know it not O soul,	  I know it not O soul,
  Nor dost thou, all is a blank before us,	  Nor dost thou, all is a blank before us,	  Nor dost thou, all is a blank before us,	  Nor dost thou, all is a blank before us,
  All waits undream'd of in that region, that inaccessible land.	  All waits undream'd of in that region, that inaccessible land.	  All waits undream'd of in that region, that inaccessible land.	  All waits undream'd of in that region, that inaccessible land.
			
  Till when the ties loosen,	  Till when the ties loosen,	  Till when the ties loosen,	  Till when the ties loosen,
  All but the ties eternal, Time and Space,	  All but the ties eternal, Time and Space,	  All but the ties eternal, Time and Space,	  All but the ties eternal, Time and Space,
  Nor darkness, gravitation, sense, nor any bounds bounding us.	  Nor darkness, gravitation, sense, nor any bounds bounding us.	  Nor darkness, gravitation, sense, nor any bounds bounding us.	  Nor darkness, gravitation, sense, nor any bounds bounding us.
			
  Then we burst forth, we float,	  Then we burst forth, we float,	  Then we burst forth, we float,	  Then we burst forth, we float,
  In Time and Space O soul, prepared for them,	  In Time and Space O soul, prepared for them,	  In Time and Space O soul, prepared for them,	  In Time and Space O soul, prepared for them,
  Equal, equipt at last, (O joy! O fruit of all!) them to fulfil O soul.	  Equal, equipt at last, (O joy! O fruit of all!) them to fulfil O soul.	  Equal, equipt at last, (O joy! O fruit of all!) them to fulfil O soul.	  Equal, equipt at last, (O joy! O fruit of all!) them to fulfil O soul.
			
			
			
			
Whispers of Heavenly Death	Whispers of Heavenly Death	Whispers of Heavenly Death	Whispers of Heavenly Death
			
  Whispers of heavenly death murmur'd I hear,	  Whispers of heavenly death murmur'd I hear,	  Whispers of heavenly death murmur'd I hear,	  Whispers of heavenly death murmur'd I hear,
  Labial gossip of night, sibilant chorals,	  Labial gossip of night, sibilant chorals,	  Labial gossip of night, sibilant chorals,	  Labial gossip of night, sibilant chorals,
  Footsteps gently ascending, mystical breezes wafted soft and low,	  Footsteps gently ascending, mystical breezes wafted soft and low,	  Footsteps gently ascending, mystical breezes wafted soft and low,	  Footsteps gently ascending, mystical breezes wafted soft and low,
  Ripples of unseen rivers, tides of a current flowing, forever flowing,	  Ripples of unseen rivers, tides of a current flowing, forever flowing,	  Ripples of unseen rivers, tides of a current flowing, forever flowing,	  Ripples of unseen rivers, tides of a current flowing, forever flowing,
  (Or is it the plashing of tears? the measureless waters of human tears?)	  (Or is it the plashing of tears? the measureless waters of human tears?)	  (Or is it the plashing of tears? the measureless waters of human tears?)	  (Or is it the plashing of tears? the measureless waters of human tears?)
			
  I see, just see skyward, great cloud-masses,	  I see, just see skyward, great cloud-masses,	  I see, just see skyward, great cloud-masses,	  I see, just see skyward, great cloud-masses,
  Mournfully slowly they roll, silently swelling and mixing,	  Mournfully slowly they roll, silently swelling and mixing,	  Mournfully slowly they roll, silently swelling and mixing,	  Mournfully slowly they roll, silently swelling and mixing,
  With at times a half-dimm'd sadden'd far-off star,	  With at times a half-dimm'd sadden'd far-off star,	  With at times a half-dimm'd sadden'd far-off star,	  With at times a half-dimm'd sadden'd far-off star,
  Appearing and disappearing.	  Appearing and disappearing.	  Appearing and disappearing.	  Appearing and disappearing.
			
  (Some parturition rather, some solemn immortal birth;	  (Some parturition rather, some solemn immortal birth;	  (Some parturition rather, some solemn immortal birth;	  (Some parturition rather, some solemn immortal birth;
  On the frontiers to eyes impenetrable,	  On the frontiers to eyes impenetrable,	  On the frontiers to eyes impenetrable,	  On the frontiers to eyes impenetrable,
  Some soul is passing over.)	  Some soul is passing over.)	  Some soul is passing over.)	  Some soul is passing over.)
			
			
			
			
Chanting the Square Deific	Chanting the Square Deific	Chanting the Square Deific	Chanting the Square Deific
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Chanting the square deific, out of the One advancing, out of the sides,	  Chanting the square deific, out of the One advancing, out of the sides,	  Chanting the square deific, out of the One advancing, out of the sides,	  Chanting the square deific, out of the One advancing, out of the sides,
  Out of the old and new, out of the square entirely divine,	  Out of the old and new, out of the square entirely divine,	  Out of the old and new, out of the square entirely divine,	  Out of the old and new, out of the square entirely divine,
  Solid, four-sided, (all the sides needed,) from this side Jehovah am I,	  Solid, four-sided, (all the sides needed,) from this side Jehovah am I,	  Solid, four-sided, (all the sides needed,) from this side Jehovah am I,	  Solid, four-sided, (all the sides needed,) from this side Jehovah am I,
  Old Brahm I, and I Saturnius am;	  Old Brahm I, and I Saturnius am;	  Old Brahm I, and I Saturnius am;	  Old Brahm I, and I Saturnius am;
  Not Time affects me--I am Time, old, modern as any,	  Not Time affects me--I am Time, old, modern as any,	  Not Time affects me--I am Time, old, modern as any,	  Not Time affects me--I am Time, old, modern as any,
  Unpersuadable, relentless, executing righteous judgments,	  Unpersuadable, relentless, executing righteous judgments,	  Unpersuadable, relentless, executing righteous judgments,	  Unpersuadable, relentless, executing righteous judgments,
  As the Earth, the Father, the brown old Kronos, with laws,	  As the Earth, the Father, the brown old Kronos, with laws,	  As the Earth, the Father, the brown old Kronos, with laws,	  As the Earth, the Father, the brown old Kronos, with laws,
  Aged beyond computation, yet never new, ever with those mighty laws rolling,	  Aged beyond computation, yet never new, ever with those mighty laws rolling,	  Aged beyond computation, yet never new, ever with those mighty laws rolling,	  Aged beyond computation, yet never new, ever with those mighty laws rolling,
  Relentless I forgive no man--whoever sins dies--I will have that man's life;	  Relentless I forgive no man--whoever sins dies--I will have that man's life;	  Relentless I forgive no man--whoever sins dies--I will have that man's life;	  Relentless I forgive no man--whoever sins dies--I will have that man's life;
  Therefore let none expect mercy--have the seasons, gravitation, the	  Therefore let none expect mercy--have the seasons, gravitation, the	  Therefore let none expect mercy--have the seasons, gravitation, the	  Therefore let none expect mercy--have the seasons, gravitation, the
      appointed days, mercy? no more have I,	      appointed days, mercy? no more have I,	      appointed days, mercy? no more have I,	      appointed days, mercy? no more have I,
  But as the seasons and gravitation, and as all the appointed days	  But as the seasons and gravitation, and as all the appointed days	  But as the seasons and gravitation, and as all the appointed days	  But as the seasons and gravitation, and as all the appointed days
      that forgive not,	      that forgive not,	      that forgive not,	      that forgive not,
  I dispense from this side judgments inexorable without the least remorse.	  I dispense from this side judgments inexorable without the least remorse.	  I dispense from this side judgments inexorable without the least remorse.	  I dispense from this side judgments inexorable without the least remorse.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Consolator most mild, the promis'd one advancing,	  Consolator most mild, the promis'd one advancing,	  Consolator most mild, the promis'd one advancing,	  Consolator most mild, the promis'd one advancing,
  With gentle hand extended, the mightier God am I,	  With gentle hand extended, the mightier God am I,	  With gentle hand extended, the mightier God am I,	  With gentle hand extended, the mightier God am I,
  Foretold by prophets and poets in their most rapt prophecies and poems,	  Foretold by prophets and poets in their most rapt prophecies and poems,	  Foretold by prophets and poets in their most rapt prophecies and poems,	  Foretold by prophets and poets in their most rapt prophecies and poems,
  From this side, lo! the Lord Christ gazes--lo! Hermes I--lo! mine is	  From this side, lo! the Lord Christ gazes--lo! Hermes I--lo! mine is	  From this side, lo! the Lord Christ gazes--lo! Hermes I--lo! mine is	  From this side, lo! the Lord Christ gazes--lo! Hermes I--lo! mine is
      Hercules' face,	      Hercules' face,	      Hercules' face,	      Hercules' face,
  All sorrow, labor, suffering, I, tallying it, absorb in myself,	  All sorrow, labor, suffering, I, tallying it, absorb in myself,	  All sorrow, labor, suffering, I, tallying it, absorb in myself,	  All sorrow, labor, suffering, I, tallying it, absorb in myself,
  Many times have I been rejected, taunted, put in prison, and	  Many times have I been rejected, taunted, put in prison, and	  Many times have I been rejected, taunted, put in prison, and	  Many times have I been rejected, taunted, put in prison, and
      crucified, and many times shall be again,	      crucified, and many times shall be again,	      crucified, and many times shall be again,	      crucified, and many times shall be again,
  All the world have I given up for my dear brothers' and sisters'	  All the world have I given up for my dear brothers' and sisters'	  All the world have I given up for my dear brothers' and sisters'	  All the world have I given up for my dear brothers' and sisters'
      sake, for the soul's sake,	      sake, for the soul's sake,	      sake, for the soul's sake,	      sake, for the soul's sake,
  Wanding my way through the homes of men, rich or poor, with the kiss	  Wanding my way through the homes of men, rich or poor, with the kiss	  Wanding my way through the homes of men, rich or poor, with the kiss	  Wanding my way through the homes of men, rich or poor, with the kiss
      of affection,	      of affection,	      of affection,	      of affection,
  For I am affection, I am the cheer-bringing God, with hope and	  For I am affection, I am the cheer-bringing God, with hope and	  For I am affection, I am the cheer-bringing God, with hope and	  For I am affection, I am the cheer-bringing God, with hope and
      all-enclosing charity,	      all-enclosing charity,	      all-enclosing charity,	      all-enclosing charity,
  With indulgent words as to children, with fresh and sane words, mine only,	  With indulgent words as to children, with fresh and sane words, mine only,	  With indulgent words as to children, with fresh and sane words, mine only,	  With indulgent words as to children, with fresh and sane words, mine only,
  Young and strong I pass knowing well I am destin'd myself to an	  Young and strong I pass knowing well I am destin'd myself to an	  Young and strong I pass knowing well I am destin'd myself to an	  Young and strong I pass knowing well I am destin'd myself to an
      early death;	      early death;	      early death;	      early death;
  But my charity has no death--my wisdom dies not, neither early nor late,	  But my charity has no death--my wisdom dies not, neither early nor late,	  But my charity has no death--my wisdom dies not, neither early nor late,	  But my charity has no death--my wisdom dies not, neither early nor late,
  And my sweet love bequeath'd here and elsewhere never dies.	  And my sweet love bequeath'd here and elsewhere never dies.	  And my sweet love bequeath'd here and elsewhere never dies.	  And my sweet love bequeath'd here and elsewhere never dies.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Aloof, dissatisfied, plotting revolt,	  Aloof, dissatisfied, plotting revolt,	  Aloof, dissatisfied, plotting revolt,	  Aloof, dissatisfied, plotting revolt,
  Comrade of criminals, brother of slaves,	  Comrade of criminals, brother of slaves,	  Comrade of criminals, brother of slaves,	  Comrade of criminals, brother of slaves,
  Crafty, despised, a drudge, ignorant,	  Crafty, despised, a drudge, ignorant,	  Crafty, despised, a drudge, ignorant,	  Crafty, despised, a drudge, ignorant,
  With sudra face and worn brow, black, but in the depths of my heart,	  With sudra face and worn brow, black, but in the depths of my heart,	  With sudra face and worn brow, black, but in the depths of my heart,	  With sudra face and worn brow, black, but in the depths of my heart,
      proud as any,	      proud as any,	      proud as any,	      proud as any,
  Lifted now and always against whoever scorning assumes to rule me,	  Lifted now and always against whoever scorning assumes to rule me,	  Lifted now and always against whoever scorning assumes to rule me,	  Lifted now and always against whoever scorning assumes to rule me,
  Morose, full of guile, full of reminiscences, brooding, with many wiles,	  Morose, full of guile, full of reminiscences, brooding, with many wiles,	  Morose, full of guile, full of reminiscences, brooding, with many wiles,	  Morose, full of guile, full of reminiscences, brooding, with many wiles,
  (Though it was thought I was baffled, and dispel'd, and my wiles	  (Though it was thought I was baffled, and dispel'd, and my wiles	  (Though it was thought I was baffled, and dispel'd, and my wiles	  (Though it was thought I was baffled, and dispel'd, and my wiles
      done, but that will never be,)	      done, but that will never be,)	      done, but that will never be,)	      done, but that will never be,)
  Defiant, I, Satan, still live, still utter words, in new lands duly	  Defiant, I, Satan, still live, still utter words, in new lands duly	  Defiant, I, Satan, still live, still utter words, in new lands duly	  Defiant, I, Satan, still live, still utter words, in new lands duly
      appearing, (and old ones also,)	      appearing, (and old ones also,)	      appearing, (and old ones also,)	      appearing, (and old ones also,)
  Permanent here from my side, warlike, equal with any, real as any,	  Permanent here from my side, warlike, equal with any, real as any,	  Permanent here from my side, warlike, equal with any, real as any,	  Permanent here from my side, warlike, equal with any, real as any,
  Nor time nor change shall ever change me or my words.	  Nor time nor change shall ever change me or my words.	  Nor time nor change shall ever change me or my words.	  Nor time nor change shall ever change me or my words.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Santa Spirita, breather, life,	  Santa Spirita, breather, life,	  Santa Spirita, breather, life,	  Santa Spirita, breather, life,
  Beyond the light, lighter than light,	  Beyond the light, lighter than light,	  Beyond the light, lighter than light,	  Beyond the light, lighter than light,
  Beyond the flames of hell, joyous, leaping easily above hell,	  Beyond the flames of hell, joyous, leaping easily above hell,	  Beyond the flames of hell, joyous, leaping easily above hell,	  Beyond the flames of hell, joyous, leaping easily above hell,
  Beyond Paradise, perfumed solely with mine own perfume,	  Beyond Paradise, perfumed solely with mine own perfume,	  Beyond Paradise, perfumed solely with mine own perfume,	  Beyond Paradise, perfumed solely with mine own perfume,
  Including all life on earth, touching, including God, including	  Including all life on earth, touching, including God, including	  Including all life on earth, touching, including God, including	  Including all life on earth, touching, including God, including
      Saviour and Satan,	      Saviour and Satan,	      Saviour and Satan,	      Saviour and Satan,
  Ethereal, pervading all, (for without me what were all? what were God?)	  Ethereal, pervading all, (for without me what were all? what were God?)	  Ethereal, pervading all, (for without me what were all? what were God?)	  Ethereal, pervading all, (for without me what were all? what were God?)
  Essence of forms, life of the real identities, permanent, positive,	  Essence of forms, life of the real identities, permanent, positive,	  Essence of forms, life of the real identities, permanent, positive,	  Essence of forms, life of the real identities, permanent, positive,
      (namely the unseen,)	      (namely the unseen,)	      (namely the unseen,)	      (namely the unseen,)
  Life of the great round world, the sun and stars, and of man, I, the	  Life of the great round world, the sun and stars, and of man, I, the	  Life of the great round world, the sun and stars, and of man, I, the	  Life of the great round world, the sun and stars, and of man, I, the
      general soul,	      general soul,	      general soul,	      general soul,
  Here the square finishing, the solid, I the most solid,	  Here the square finishing, the solid, I the most solid,	  Here the square finishing, the solid, I the most solid,	  Here the square finishing, the solid, I the most solid,
  Breathe my breath also through these songs.	  Breathe my breath also through these songs.	  Breathe my breath also through these songs.	  Breathe my breath also through these songs.
			
			
			
			
Of Him I Love Day and Night	Of Him I Love Day and Night	Of Him I Love Day and Night	Of Him I Love Day and Night
			
  Of him I love day and night I dream'd I heard he was dead,	  Of him I love day and night I dream'd I heard he was dead,	  Of him I love day and night I dream'd I heard he was dead,	  Of him I love day and night I dream'd I heard he was dead,
  And I dream'd I went where they had buried him I love, but he was	  And I dream'd I went where they had buried him I love, but he was	  And I dream'd I went where they had buried him I love, but he was	  And I dream'd I went where they had buried him I love, but he was
      not in that place,	      not in that place,	      not in that place,	      not in that place,
  And I dream'd I wander'd searching among burial-places to find him,	  And I dream'd I wander'd searching among burial-places to find him,	  And I dream'd I wander'd searching among burial-places to find him,	  And I dream'd I wander'd searching among burial-places to find him,
  And I found that every place was a burial-place;	  And I found that every place was a burial-place;	  And I found that every place was a burial-place;	  And I found that every place was a burial-place;
  The houses full of life were equally full of death, (this house is now,)	  The houses full of life were equally full of death, (this house is now,)	  The houses full of life were equally full of death, (this house is now,)	  The houses full of life were equally full of death, (this house is now,)
  The streets, the shipping, the places of amusement, the Chicago,	  The streets, the shipping, the places of amusement, the Chicago,	  The streets, the shipping, the places of amusement, the Chicago,	  The streets, the shipping, the places of amusement, the Chicago,
      Boston, Philadelphia, the Mannahatta, were as full of the dead as	      Boston, Philadelphia, the Mannahatta, were as full of the dead as	      Boston, Philadelphia, the Mannahatta, were as full of the dead as	      Boston, Philadelphia, the Mannahatta, were as full of the dead as
      of the living,	      of the living,	      of the living,	      of the living,
  And fuller, O vastly fuller of the dead than of the living;	  And fuller, O vastly fuller of the dead than of the living;	  And fuller, O vastly fuller of the dead than of the living;	  And fuller, O vastly fuller of the dead than of the living;
  And what I dream'd I will henceforth tell to every person and age,	  And what I dream'd I will henceforth tell to every person and age,	  And what I dream'd I will henceforth tell to every person and age,	  And what I dream'd I will henceforth tell to every person and age,
  And I stand henceforth bound to what I dream'd,	  And I stand henceforth bound to what I dream'd,	  And I stand henceforth bound to what I dream'd,	  And I stand henceforth bound to what I dream'd,
  And now I am willing to disregard burial-places and dispense with them,	  And now I am willing to disregard burial-places and dispense with them,	  And now I am willing to disregard burial-places and dispense with them,	  And now I am willing to disregard burial-places and dispense with them,
  And if the memorials of the dead were put up indifferently everywhere,	  And if the memorials of the dead were put up indifferently everywhere,	  And if the memorials of the dead were put up indifferently everywhere,	  And if the memorials of the dead were put up indifferently everywhere,
      even in the room where I eat or sleep, I should be satisfied,	      even in the room where I eat or sleep, I should be satisfied,	      even in the room where I eat or sleep, I should be satisfied,	      even in the room where I eat or sleep, I should be satisfied,
  And if the corpse of any one I love, or if my own corpse, be duly	  And if the corpse of any one I love, or if my own corpse, be duly	  And if the corpse of any one I love, or if my own corpse, be duly	  And if the corpse of any one I love, or if my own corpse, be duly
      render'd to powder and pour'd in the sea, I shall be satisfied,	      render'd to powder and pour'd in the sea, I shall be satisfied,	      render'd to powder and pour'd in the sea, I shall be satisfied,	      render'd to powder and pour'd in the sea, I shall be satisfied,
  Or if it be distributed to the winds I shall be satisfied.	  Or if it be distributed to the winds I shall be satisfied.	  Or if it be distributed to the winds I shall be satisfied.	  Or if it be distributed to the winds I shall be satisfied.
			
			
			
			
Yet, Yet, Ye Downcast Hours	Yet, Yet, Ye Downcast Hours	Yet, Yet, Ye Downcast Hours	Yet, Yet, Ye Downcast Hours
			
  Yet, yet, ye downcast hours, I know ye also,	  Yet, yet, ye downcast hours, I know ye also,	  Yet, yet, ye downcast hours, I know ye also,	  Yet, yet, ye downcast hours, I know ye also,
  Weights of lead, how ye clog and cling at my ankles,	  Weights of lead, how ye clog and cling at my ankles,	  Weights of lead, how ye clog and cling at my ankles,	  Weights of lead, how ye clog and cling at my ankles,
  Earth to a chamber of mourning turns--I hear the o'erweening, mocking	  Earth to a chamber of mourning turns--I hear the o'erweening, mocking	  Earth to a chamber of mourning turns--I hear the o'erweening, mocking	  Earth to a chamber of mourning turns--I hear the o'erweening, mocking
      voice,	      voice,	      voice,	      voice,
  Matter is conqueror--matter, triumphant only, continues onward.	  Matter is conqueror--matter, triumphant only, continues onward.	  Matter is conqueror--matter, triumphant only, continues onward.	  Matter is conqueror--matter, triumphant only, continues onward.
			
  Despairing cries float ceaselessly toward me,	  Despairing cries float ceaselessly toward me,	  Despairing cries float ceaselessly toward me,	  Despairing cries float ceaselessly toward me,
  The call of my nearest lover, putting forth, alarm'd, uncertain,	  The call of my nearest lover, putting forth, alarm'd, uncertain,	  The call of my nearest lover, putting forth, alarm'd, uncertain,	  The call of my nearest lover, putting forth, alarm'd, uncertain,
  The sea I am quickly to sail, come tell me,	  The sea I am quickly to sail, come tell me,	  The sea I am quickly to sail, come tell me,	  The sea I am quickly to sail, come tell me,
  Come tell me where I am speeding, tell me my destination.	  Come tell me where I am speeding, tell me my destination.	  Come tell me where I am speeding, tell me my destination.	  Come tell me where I am speeding, tell me my destination.
			
  I understand your anguish, but I cannot help you,	  I understand your anguish, but I cannot help you,	  I understand your anguish, but I cannot help you,	  I understand your anguish, but I cannot help you,
  I approach, hear, behold, the sad mouth, the look out of the eyes,	  I approach, hear, behold, the sad mouth, the look out of the eyes,	  I approach, hear, behold, the sad mouth, the look out of the eyes,	  I approach, hear, behold, the sad mouth, the look out of the eyes,
      your mute inquiry,	      your mute inquiry,	      your mute inquiry,	      your mute inquiry,
  Whither I go from the bed I recline on, come tell me,--	  Whither I go from the bed I recline on, come tell me,--	  Whither I go from the bed I recline on, come tell me,--	  Whither I go from the bed I recline on, come tell me,--
  Old age, alarm'd, uncertain--a young woman's voice, appealing to	  Old age, alarm'd, uncertain--a young woman's voice, appealing to	  Old age, alarm'd, uncertain--a young woman's voice, appealing to	  Old age, alarm'd, uncertain--a young woman's voice, appealing to
      me for comfort;	      me for comfort;	      me for comfort;	      me for comfort;
  A young man's voice, Shall I not escape?	  A young man's voice, Shall I not escape?	  A young man's voice, Shall I not escape?	  A young man's voice, Shall I not escape?
			
			
			
			
As If a Phantom Caress'd Me	As If a Phantom Caress'd Me	As If a Phantom Caress'd Me	As If a Phantom Caress'd Me
			
  As if a phantom caress'd me,	  As if a phantom caress'd me,	  As if a phantom caress'd me,	  As if a phantom caress'd me,
  I thought I was not alone walking here by the shore;	  I thought I was not alone walking here by the shore;	  I thought I was not alone walking here by the shore;	  I thought I was not alone walking here by the shore;
  But the one I thought was with me as now I walk by the shore, the	  But the one I thought was with me as now I walk by the shore, the	  But the one I thought was with me as now I walk by the shore, the	  But the one I thought was with me as now I walk by the shore, the
      one I loved that caress'd me,	      one I loved that caress'd me,	      one I loved that caress'd me,	      one I loved that caress'd me,
  As I lean and look through the glimmering light, that one has	  As I lean and look through the glimmering light, that one has	  As I lean and look through the glimmering light, that one has	  As I lean and look through the glimmering light, that one has
      utterly disappear'd.	      utterly disappear'd.	      utterly disappear'd.	      utterly disappear'd.
  And those appear that are hateful to me and mock me.	  And those appear that are hateful to me and mock me.	  And those appear that are hateful to me and mock me.	  And those appear that are hateful to me and mock me.
			
			
			
			
Assurances	Assurances	Assurances	Assurances
			
  I need no assurances, I am a man who is preoccupied of his own soul;	  I need no assurances, I am a man who is preoccupied of his own soul;	  I need no assurances, I am a man who is preoccupied of his own soul;	  I need no assurances, I am a man who is preoccupied of his own soul;
  I do not doubt that from under the feet and beside the hands and	  I do not doubt that from under the feet and beside the hands and	  I do not doubt that from under the feet and beside the hands and	  I do not doubt that from under the feet and beside the hands and
      face I am cognizant of, are now looking faces I am not cognizant	      face I am cognizant of, are now looking faces I am not cognizant	      face I am cognizant of, are now looking faces I am not cognizant	      face I am cognizant of, are now looking faces I am not cognizant
      of, calm and actual faces,	      of, calm and actual faces,	      of, calm and actual faces,	      of, calm and actual faces,
  I do not doubt but the majesty and beauty of the world are latent in	  I do not doubt but the majesty and beauty of the world are latent in	  I do not doubt but the majesty and beauty of the world are latent in	  I do not doubt but the majesty and beauty of the world are latent in
      any iota of the world,	      any iota of the world,	      any iota of the world,	      any iota of the world,
  I do not doubt I am limitless, and that the universes are limitless,	  I do not doubt I am limitless, and that the universes are limitless,	  I do not doubt I am limitless, and that the universes are limitless,	  I do not doubt I am limitless, and that the universes are limitless,
      in vain I try to think how limitless,	      in vain I try to think how limitless,	      in vain I try to think how limitless,	      in vain I try to think how limitless,
  I do not doubt that the orbs and the systems of orbs play their	  I do not doubt that the orbs and the systems of orbs play their	  I do not doubt that the orbs and the systems of orbs play their	  I do not doubt that the orbs and the systems of orbs play their
      swift sports through the air on purpose, and that I shall one day	      swift sports through the air on purpose, and that I shall one day	      swift sports through the air on purpose, and that I shall one day	      swift sports through the air on purpose, and that I shall one day
      be eligible to do as much as they, and more than they,	      be eligible to do as much as they, and more than they,	      be eligible to do as much as they, and more than they,	      be eligible to do as much as they, and more than they,
  I do not doubt that temporary affairs keep on and on millions of years,	  I do not doubt that temporary affairs keep on and on millions of years,	  I do not doubt that temporary affairs keep on and on millions of years,	  I do not doubt that temporary affairs keep on and on millions of years,
  I do not doubt interiors have their interiors, and exteriors have	  I do not doubt interiors have their interiors, and exteriors have	  I do not doubt interiors have their interiors, and exteriors have	  I do not doubt interiors have their interiors, and exteriors have
      their exteriors, and that the eyesight has another eyesight, and	      their exteriors, and that the eyesight has another eyesight, and	      their exteriors, and that the eyesight has another eyesight, and	      their exteriors, and that the eyesight has another eyesight, and
      the hearing another hearing, and the voice another voice,	      the hearing another hearing, and the voice another voice,	      the hearing another hearing, and the voice another voice,	      the hearing another hearing, and the voice another voice,
  I do not doubt that the passionately-wept deaths of young men are	  I do not doubt that the passionately-wept deaths of young men are	  I do not doubt that the passionately-wept deaths of young men are	  I do not doubt that the passionately-wept deaths of young men are
      provided for, and that the deaths of young women and the	      provided for, and that the deaths of young women and the	      provided for, and that the deaths of young women and the	      provided for, and that the deaths of young women and the
      deaths of little children are provided for,	      deaths of little children are provided for,	      deaths of little children are provided for,	      deaths of little children are provided for,
  (Did you think Life was so well provided for, and Death, the purport	  (Did you think Life was so well provided for, and Death, the purport	  (Did you think Life was so well provided for, and Death, the purport	  (Did you think Life was so well provided for, and Death, the purport
      of all Life, is not well provided for?)	      of all Life, is not well provided for?)	      of all Life, is not well provided for?)	      of all Life, is not well provided for?)
  I do not doubt that wrecks at sea, no matter what the horrors of	  I do not doubt that wrecks at sea, no matter what the horrors of	  I do not doubt that wrecks at sea, no matter what the horrors of	  I do not doubt that wrecks at sea, no matter what the horrors of
      them, no matter whose wife, child, husband, father, lover, has	      them, no matter whose wife, child, husband, father, lover, has	      them, no matter whose wife, child, husband, father, lover, has	      them, no matter whose wife, child, husband, father, lover, has
      gone down, are provided for, to the minutest points,	      gone down, are provided for, to the minutest points,	      gone down, are provided for, to the minutest points,	      gone down, are provided for, to the minutest points,
  I do not doubt that whatever can possibly happen anywhere at any	  I do not doubt that whatever can possibly happen anywhere at any	  I do not doubt that whatever can possibly happen anywhere at any	  I do not doubt that whatever can possibly happen anywhere at any
      time, is provided for in the inherences of things,	      time, is provided for in the inherences of things,	      time, is provided for in the inherences of things,	      time, is provided for in the inherences of things,
  I do not think Life provides for all and for Time and Space, but I	  I do not think Life provides for all and for Time and Space, but I	  I do not think Life provides for all and for Time and Space, but I	  I do not think Life provides for all and for Time and Space, but I
      believe Heavenly Death provides for all.	      believe Heavenly Death provides for all.	      believe Heavenly Death provides for all.	      believe Heavenly Death provides for all.
			
			
			
			
Quicksand Years	Quicksand Years	Quicksand Years	Quicksand Years
			
  Quicksand years that whirl me I know not whither,	  Quicksand years that whirl me I know not whither,	  Quicksand years that whirl me I know not whither,	  Quicksand years that whirl me I know not whither,
  Your schemes, politics, fail, lines give way, substances mock and elude me,	  Your schemes, politics, fail, lines give way, substances mock and elude me,	  Your schemes, politics, fail, lines give way, substances mock and elude me,	  Your schemes, politics, fail, lines give way, substances mock and elude me,
  Only the theme I sing, the great and strong-possess'd soul, eludes not,	  Only the theme I sing, the great and strong-possess'd soul, eludes not,	  Only the theme I sing, the great and strong-possess'd soul, eludes not,	  Only the theme I sing, the great and strong-possess'd soul, eludes not,
  One's-self must never give way--that is the final substance--that	  One's-self must never give way--that is the final substance--that	  One's-self must never give way--that is the final substance--that	  One's-self must never give way--that is the final substance--that
      out of all is sure,	      out of all is sure,	      out of all is sure,	      out of all is sure,
  Out of politics, triumphs, battles, life, what at last finally remains?	  Out of politics, triumphs, battles, life, what at last finally remains?	  Out of politics, triumphs, battles, life, what at last finally remains?	  Out of politics, triumphs, battles, life, what at last finally remains?
  When shows break up what but One's-Self is sure?	  When shows break up what but One's-Self is sure?	  When shows break up what but One's-Self is sure?	  When shows break up what but One's-Self is sure?
			
			
			
			
That Music Always Round Me	That Music Always Round Me	That Music Always Round Me	That Music Always Round Me
			
  That music always round me, unceasing, unbeginning, yet long	  That music always round me, unceasing, unbeginning, yet long	  That music always round me, unceasing, unbeginning, yet long	  That music always round me, unceasing, unbeginning, yet long
      untaught I did not hear,	      untaught I did not hear,	      untaught I did not hear,	      untaught I did not hear,
  But now the chorus I hear and am elated,	  But now the chorus I hear and am elated,	  But now the chorus I hear and am elated,	  But now the chorus I hear and am elated,
  A tenor, strong, ascending with power and health, with glad notes of	  A tenor, strong, ascending with power and health, with glad notes of	  A tenor, strong, ascending with power and health, with glad notes of	  A tenor, strong, ascending with power and health, with glad notes of
      daybreak I hear,	      daybreak I hear,	      daybreak I hear,	      daybreak I hear,
  A soprano at intervals sailing buoyantly over the tops of immense waves,	  A soprano at intervals sailing buoyantly over the tops of immense waves,	  A soprano at intervals sailing buoyantly over the tops of immense waves,	  A soprano at intervals sailing buoyantly over the tops of immense waves,
  A transparent base shuddering lusciously under and through the universe,	  A transparent base shuddering lusciously under and through the universe,	  A transparent base shuddering lusciously under and through the universe,	  A transparent base shuddering lusciously under and through the universe,
  The triumphant tutti, the funeral wailings with sweet flutes and	  The triumphant tutti, the funeral wailings with sweet flutes and	  The triumphant tutti, the funeral wailings with sweet flutes and	  The triumphant tutti, the funeral wailings with sweet flutes and
      violins, all these I fill myself with,	      violins, all these I fill myself with,	      violins, all these I fill myself with,	      violins, all these I fill myself with,
  I hear not the volumes of sound merely, I am moved by the exquisite	  I hear not the volumes of sound merely, I am moved by the exquisite	  I hear not the volumes of sound merely, I am moved by the exquisite	  I hear not the volumes of sound merely, I am moved by the exquisite
      meanings,	      meanings,	      meanings,	      meanings,
  I listen to the different voices winding in and out, striving,	  I listen to the different voices winding in and out, striving,	  I listen to the different voices winding in and out, striving,	  I listen to the different voices winding in and out, striving,
      contending with fiery vehemence to excel each other in emotion;	      contending with fiery vehemence to excel each other in emotion;	      contending with fiery vehemence to excel each other in emotion;	      contending with fiery vehemence to excel each other in emotion;
  I do not think the performers know themselves--but now I think	  I do not think the performers know themselves--but now I think	  I do not think the performers know themselves--but now I think	  I do not think the performers know themselves--but now I think
      begin to know them.	      begin to know them.	      begin to know them.	      begin to know them.
			
			
			
			
What Ship Puzzled at Sea	What Ship Puzzled at Sea	What Ship Puzzled at Sea	What Ship Puzzled at Sea
			
  What ship puzzled at sea, cons for the true reckoning?	  What ship puzzled at sea, cons for the true reckoning?	  What ship puzzled at sea, cons for the true reckoning?	  What ship puzzled at sea, cons for the true reckoning?
  Or coming in, to avoid the bars and follow the channel a perfect	  Or coming in, to avoid the bars and follow the channel a perfect	  Or coming in, to avoid the bars and follow the channel a perfect	  Or coming in, to avoid the bars and follow the channel a perfect
      pilot needs?	      pilot needs?	      pilot needs?	      pilot needs?
  Here, sailor! here, ship! take aboard the most perfect pilot,	  Here, sailor! here, ship! take aboard the most perfect pilot,	  Here, sailor! here, ship! take aboard the most perfect pilot,	  Here, sailor! here, ship! take aboard the most perfect pilot,
  Whom, in a little boat, putting off and rowing, I hailing you offer.	  Whom, in a little boat, putting off and rowing, I hailing you offer.	  Whom, in a little boat, putting off and rowing, I hailing you offer.	  Whom, in a little boat, putting off and rowing, I hailing you offer.
			
			
			
			
A Noiseless Patient Spider	A Noiseless Patient Spider	A Noiseless Patient Spider	A Noiseless Patient Spider
			
  A noiseless patient spider,	  A noiseless patient spider,	  A noiseless patient spider,	  A noiseless patient spider,
  I mark'd where on a little promontory it stood isolated,	  I mark'd where on a little promontory it stood isolated,	  I mark'd where on a little promontory it stood isolated,	  I mark'd where on a little promontory it stood isolated,
  Mark'd how to explore the vacant vast surrounding,	  Mark'd how to explore the vacant vast surrounding,	  Mark'd how to explore the vacant vast surrounding,	  Mark'd how to explore the vacant vast surrounding,
  It launch'd forth filament, filament, filament out of itself,	  It launch'd forth filament, filament, filament out of itself,	  It launch'd forth filament, filament, filament out of itself,	  It launch'd forth filament, filament, filament out of itself,
  Ever unreeling them, ever tirelessly speeding them.	  Ever unreeling them, ever tirelessly speeding them.	  Ever unreeling them, ever tirelessly speeding them.	  Ever unreeling them, ever tirelessly speeding them.
			
  And you O my soul where you stand,	  And you O my soul where you stand,	  And you O my soul where you stand,	  And you O my soul where you stand,
  Surrounded, detached, in measureless oceans of space,	  Surrounded, detached, in measureless oceans of space,	  Surrounded, detached, in measureless oceans of space,	  Surrounded, detached, in measureless oceans of space,
  Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing, seeking the spheres to	  Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing, seeking the spheres to	  Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing, seeking the spheres to	  Ceaselessly musing, venturing, throwing, seeking the spheres to
      connect them,	      connect them,	      connect them,	      connect them,
  Till the bridge you will need be form'd, till the ductile anchor hold,	  Till the bridge you will need be form'd, till the ductile anchor hold,	  Till the bridge you will need be form'd, till the ductile anchor hold,	  Till the bridge you will need be form'd, till the ductile anchor hold,
  Till the gossamer thread you fling catch somewhere, O my soul.	  Till the gossamer thread you fling catch somewhere, O my soul.	  Till the gossamer thread you fling catch somewhere, O my soul.	  Till the gossamer thread you fling catch somewhere, O my soul.
			
			
			
			
O Living Always, Always Dying	O Living Always, Always Dying	O Living Always, Always Dying	O Living Always, Always Dying
			
  O living always, always dying!	  O living always, always dying!	  O living always, always dying!	  O living always, always dying!
  O the burials of me past and present,	  O the burials of me past and present,	  O the burials of me past and present,	  O the burials of me past and present,
  O me while I stride ahead, material, visible, imperious as ever;	  O me while I stride ahead, material, visible, imperious as ever;	  O me while I stride ahead, material, visible, imperious as ever;	  O me while I stride ahead, material, visible, imperious as ever;
  O me, what I was for years, now dead, (I lament not, I am content;)	  O me, what I was for years, now dead, (I lament not, I am content;)	  O me, what I was for years, now dead, (I lament not, I am content;)	  O me, what I was for years, now dead, (I lament not, I am content;)
  O to disengage myself from those corpses of me, which I turn and	  O to disengage myself from those corpses of me, which I turn and	  O to disengage myself from those corpses of me, which I turn and	  O to disengage myself from those corpses of me, which I turn and
      look at where I cast them,	      look at where I cast them,	      look at where I cast them,	      look at where I cast them,
  To pass on, (O living! always living!) and leave the corpses behind.	  To pass on, (O living! always living!) and leave the corpses behind.	  To pass on, (O living! always living!) and leave the corpses behind.	  To pass on, (O living! always living!) and leave the corpses behind.
			
			
			
			
To One Shortly to Die	To One Shortly to Die	To One Shortly to Die	To One Shortly to Die
			
  From all the rest I single out you, having a message for you,	  From all the rest I single out you, having a message for you,	  From all the rest I single out you, having a message for you,	  From all the rest I single out you, having a message for you,
  You are to die--let others tell you what they please, I cannot prevaricate,	  You are to die--let others tell you what they please, I cannot prevaricate,	  You are to die--let others tell you what they please, I cannot prevaricate,	  You are to die--let others tell you what they please, I cannot prevaricate,
  I am exact and merciless, but I love you--there is no escape for you.	  I am exact and merciless, but I love you--there is no escape for you.	  I am exact and merciless, but I love you--there is no escape for you.	  I am exact and merciless, but I love you--there is no escape for you.
			
  Softly I lay my right hand upon you, you 'ust feel it,	  Softly I lay my right hand upon you, you 'ust feel it,	  Softly I lay my right hand upon you, you 'ust feel it,	  Softly I lay my right hand upon you, you 'ust feel it,
  I do not argue, I bend my head close and half envelop it,	  I do not argue, I bend my head close and half envelop it,	  I do not argue, I bend my head close and half envelop it,	  I do not argue, I bend my head close and half envelop it,
  I sit quietly by, I remain faithful,	  I sit quietly by, I remain faithful,	  I sit quietly by, I remain faithful,	  I sit quietly by, I remain faithful,
  I am more than nurse, more than parent or neighbor,	  I am more than nurse, more than parent or neighbor,	  I am more than nurse, more than parent or neighbor,	  I am more than nurse, more than parent or neighbor,
  I absolve you from all except yourself spiritual bodily, that is	  I absolve you from all except yourself spiritual bodily, that is	  I absolve you from all except yourself spiritual bodily, that is	  I absolve you from all except yourself spiritual bodily, that is
      eternal, you yourself will surely escape,	      eternal, you yourself will surely escape,	      eternal, you yourself will surely escape,	      eternal, you yourself will surely escape,
  The corpse you will leave will be but excrementitious.	  The corpse you will leave will be but excrementitious.	  The corpse you will leave will be but excrementitious.	  The corpse you will leave will be but excrementitious.
			
  The sun bursts through in unlooked-for directions,	  The sun bursts through in unlooked-for directions,	  The sun bursts through in unlooked-for directions,	  The sun bursts through in unlooked-for directions,
  Strong thoughts fill you and confidence, you smile,	  Strong thoughts fill you and confidence, you smile,	  Strong thoughts fill you and confidence, you smile,	  Strong thoughts fill you and confidence, you smile,
  You forget you are sick, as I forget you are sick,	  You forget you are sick, as I forget you are sick,	  You forget you are sick, as I forget you are sick,	  You forget you are sick, as I forget you are sick,
  You do not see the medicines, you do not mind the weeping friends,	  You do not see the medicines, you do not mind the weeping friends,	  You do not see the medicines, you do not mind the weeping friends,	  You do not see the medicines, you do not mind the weeping friends,
      I am with you,	      I am with you,	      I am with you,	      I am with you,
  I exclude others from you, there is nothing to be commiserated,	  I exclude others from you, there is nothing to be commiserated,	  I exclude others from you, there is nothing to be commiserated,	  I exclude others from you, there is nothing to be commiserated,
  I do not commiserate, I congratulate you.	  I do not commiserate, I congratulate you.	  I do not commiserate, I congratulate you.	  I do not commiserate, I congratulate you.
			
			
			
			
Night on the Prairies	Night on the Prairies	Night on the Prairies	Night on the Prairies
			
  Night on the prairies,	  Night on the prairies,	  Night on the prairies,	  Night on the prairies,
  The supper is over, the fire on the ground burns low,	  The supper is over, the fire on the ground burns low,	  The supper is over, the fire on the ground burns low,	  The supper is over, the fire on the ground burns low,
  The wearied emigrants sleep, wrapt in their blankets;	  The wearied emigrants sleep, wrapt in their blankets;	  The wearied emigrants sleep, wrapt in their blankets;	  The wearied emigrants sleep, wrapt in their blankets;
  I walk by myself--I stand and look at the stars, which I think now	  I walk by myself--I stand and look at the stars, which I think now	  I walk by myself--I stand and look at the stars, which I think now	  I walk by myself--I stand and look at the stars, which I think now
      never realized before.	      never realized before.	      never realized before.	      never realized before.
			
  Now I absorb immortality and peace,	  Now I absorb immortality and peace,	  Now I absorb immortality and peace,	  Now I absorb immortality and peace,
  I admire death and test propositions.	  I admire death and test propositions.	  I admire death and test propositions.	  I admire death and test propositions.
			
  How plenteous! how spiritual! how resume!	  How plenteous! how spiritual! how resume!	  How plenteous! how spiritual! how resume!	  How plenteous! how spiritual! how resume!
  The same old man and soul--the same old aspirations, and the same content.	  The same old man and soul--the same old aspirations, and the same content.	  The same old man and soul--the same old aspirations, and the same content.	  The same old man and soul--the same old aspirations, and the same content.
			
  I was thinking the day most splendid till I saw what the not-day exhibited,	  I was thinking the day most splendid till I saw what the not-day exhibited,	  I was thinking the day most splendid till I saw what the not-day exhibited,	  I was thinking the day most splendid till I saw what the not-day exhibited,
  I was thinking this globe enough till there sprang out so noiseless	  I was thinking this globe enough till there sprang out so noiseless	  I was thinking this globe enough till there sprang out so noiseless	  I was thinking this globe enough till there sprang out so noiseless
      around me myriads of other globes.	      around me myriads of other globes.	      around me myriads of other globes.	      around me myriads of other globes.
			
  Now while the great thoughts of space and eternity fill me I will	  Now while the great thoughts of space and eternity fill me I will	  Now while the great thoughts of space and eternity fill me I will	  Now while the great thoughts of space and eternity fill me I will
      measure myself by them,	      measure myself by them,	      measure myself by them,	      measure myself by them,
  And now touch'd with the lives of other globes arrived as far along	  And now touch'd with the lives of other globes arrived as far along	  And now touch'd with the lives of other globes arrived as far along	  And now touch'd with the lives of other globes arrived as far along
      as those of the earth,	      as those of the earth,	      as those of the earth,	      as those of the earth,
  Or waiting to arrive, or pass'd on farther than those of the earth,	  Or waiting to arrive, or pass'd on farther than those of the earth,	  Or waiting to arrive, or pass'd on farther than those of the earth,	  Or waiting to arrive, or pass'd on farther than those of the earth,
  I henceforth no more ignore them than I ignore my own life,	  I henceforth no more ignore them than I ignore my own life,	  I henceforth no more ignore them than I ignore my own life,	  I henceforth no more ignore them than I ignore my own life,
  Or the lives of the earth arrived as far as mine, or waiting to arrive.	  Or the lives of the earth arrived as far as mine, or waiting to arrive.	  Or the lives of the earth arrived as far as mine, or waiting to arrive.	  Or the lives of the earth arrived as far as mine, or waiting to arrive.
			
  O I see now that life cannot exhibit all to me, as the day cannot,	  O I see now that life cannot exhibit all to me, as the day cannot,	  O I see now that life cannot exhibit all to me, as the day cannot,	  O I see now that life cannot exhibit all to me, as the day cannot,
  I see that I am to wait for what will be exhibited by death.	  I see that I am to wait for what will be exhibited by death.	  I see that I am to wait for what will be exhibited by death.	  I see that I am to wait for what will be exhibited by death.
			
			
			
			
Thought	Thought	Thought	Thought
			
  As I sit with others at a great feast, suddenly while the music is playing,	  As I sit with others at a great feast, suddenly while the music is playing,	  As I sit with others at a great feast, suddenly while the music is playing,	  As I sit with others at a great feast, suddenly while the music is playing,
  To my mind, (whence it comes I know not,) spectral in mist of a	  To my mind, (whence it comes I know not,) spectral in mist of a	  To my mind, (whence it comes I know not,) spectral in mist of a	  To my mind, (whence it comes I know not,) spectral in mist of a
      wreck at sea,	      wreck at sea,	      wreck at sea,	      wreck at sea,
  Of certain ships, how they sail from port with flying streamers and	  Of certain ships, how they sail from port with flying streamers and	  Of certain ships, how they sail from port with flying streamers and	  Of certain ships, how they sail from port with flying streamers and
      wafted kisses, and that is the last of them,	      wafted kisses, and that is the last of them,	      wafted kisses, and that is the last of them,	      wafted kisses, and that is the last of them,
  Of the solemn and murky mystery about the fate of the President,	  Of the solemn and murky mystery about the fate of the President,	  Of the solemn and murky mystery about the fate of the President,	  Of the solemn and murky mystery about the fate of the President,
  Of the flower of the marine science of fifty generations founder'd	  Of the flower of the marine science of fifty generations founder'd	  Of the flower of the marine science of fifty generations founder'd	  Of the flower of the marine science of fifty generations founder'd
      off the Northeast coast and going down--of the steamship Arctic	      off the Northeast coast and going down--of the steamship Arctic	      off the Northeast coast and going down--of the steamship Arctic	      off the Northeast coast and going down--of the steamship Arctic
      going down,	      going down,	      going down,	      going down,
  Of the veil'd tableau-women gather'd together on deck, pale, heroic,	  Of the veil'd tableau-women gather'd together on deck, pale, heroic,	  Of the veil'd tableau-women gather'd together on deck, pale, heroic,	  Of the veil'd tableau-women gather'd together on deck, pale, heroic,
      waiting the moment that draws so close--O the moment!	      waiting the moment that draws so close--O the moment!	      waiting the moment that draws so close--O the moment!	      waiting the moment that draws so close--O the moment!
			
  A huge sob--a few bubbles--the white foam spirting up--and then the	  A huge sob--a few bubbles--the white foam spirting up--and then the	  A huge sob--a few bubbles--the white foam spirting up--and then the	  A huge sob--a few bubbles--the white foam spirting up--and then the
      women gone,	      women gone,	      women gone,	      women gone,
  Sinking there while the passionless wet flows on--and I now	  Sinking there while the passionless wet flows on--and I now	  Sinking there while the passionless wet flows on--and I now	  Sinking there while the passionless wet flows on--and I now
      pondering, Are those women indeed gone?	      pondering, Are those women indeed gone?	      pondering, Are those women indeed gone?	      pondering, Are those women indeed gone?
  Are souls drown'd and destroy'd so?	  Are souls drown'd and destroy'd so?	  Are souls drown'd and destroy'd so?	  Are souls drown'd and destroy'd so?
  Is only matter triumphant?	  Is only matter triumphant?	  Is only matter triumphant?	  Is only matter triumphant?
			
			
			
			
The Last Invocation	The Last Invocation	The Last Invocation	The Last Invocation
			
  At the last, tenderly,	  At the last, tenderly,	  At the last, tenderly,	  At the last, tenderly,
  From the walls of the powerful fortress'd house,	  From the walls of the powerful fortress'd house,	  From the walls of the powerful fortress'd house,	  From the walls of the powerful fortress'd house,
  From the clasp of the knitted locks, from the keep of the well-closed doors,	  From the clasp of the knitted locks, from the keep of the well-closed doors,	  From the clasp of the knitted locks, from the keep of the well-closed doors,	  From the clasp of the knitted locks, from the keep of the well-closed doors,
  Let me be wafted.	  Let me be wafted.	  Let me be wafted.	  Let me be wafted.
			
  Let me glide noiselessly forth;	  Let me glide noiselessly forth;	  Let me glide noiselessly forth;	  Let me glide noiselessly forth;
  With the key of softness unlock the locks--with a whisper,	  With the key of softness unlock the locks--with a whisper,	  With the key of softness unlock the locks--with a whisper,	  With the key of softness unlock the locks--with a whisper,
  Set ope the doors O soul.	  Set ope the doors O soul.	  Set ope the doors O soul.	  Set ope the doors O soul.
			
  Tenderly--be not impatient,	  Tenderly--be not impatient,	  Tenderly--be not impatient,	  Tenderly--be not impatient,
  (Strong is your hold O mortal flesh,	  (Strong is your hold O mortal flesh,	  (Strong is your hold O mortal flesh,	  (Strong is your hold O mortal flesh,
  Strong is your hold O love.)	  Strong is your hold O love.)	  Strong is your hold O love.)	  Strong is your hold O love.)
			
			
			
			
As I Watch the Ploughman Ploughing	As I Watch the Ploughman Ploughing	As I Watch the Ploughman Ploughing	As I Watch the Ploughman Ploughing
			
  As I watch'd the ploughman ploughing,	  As I watch'd the ploughman ploughing,	  As I watch'd the ploughman ploughing,	  As I watch'd the ploughman ploughing,
  Or the sower sowing in the fields, or the harvester harvesting,	  Or the sower sowing in the fields, or the harvester harvesting,	  Or the sower sowing in the fields, or the harvester harvesting,	  Or the sower sowing in the fields, or the harvester harvesting,
  I saw there too, O life and death, your analogies;	  I saw there too, O life and death, your analogies;	  I saw there too, O life and death, your analogies;	  I saw there too, O life and death, your analogies;
  (Life, life is the tillage, and Death is the harvest according.)	  (Life, life is the tillage, and Death is the harvest according.)	  (Life, life is the tillage, and Death is the harvest according.)	  (Life, life is the tillage, and Death is the harvest according.)
			
			
			
			
Pensive and Faltering	Pensive and Faltering	Pensive and Faltering	Pensive and Faltering
			
  Pensive and faltering,	  Pensive and faltering,	  Pensive and faltering,	  Pensive and faltering,
  The words the Dead I write,	  The words the Dead I write,	  The words the Dead I write,	  The words the Dead I write,
  For living are the Dead,	  For living are the Dead,	  For living are the Dead,	  For living are the Dead,
  (Haply the only living, only real,	  (Haply the only living, only real,	  (Haply the only living, only real,	  (Haply the only living, only real,
  And I the apparition, I the spectre.)	  And I the apparition, I the spectre.)	  And I the apparition, I the spectre.)	  And I the apparition, I the spectre.)
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXXI	BOOK XXXI	BOOK XXXI	BOOK XXXI
			
			
Thou Mother with Thy Equal Brood	Thou Mother with Thy Equal Brood	Thou Mother with Thy Equal Brood	Thou Mother with Thy Equal Brood
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Thou Mother with thy equal brood,	  Thou Mother with thy equal brood,	  Thou Mother with thy equal brood,	  Thou Mother with thy equal brood,
  Thou varied chain of different States, yet one identity only,	  Thou varied chain of different States, yet one identity only,	  Thou varied chain of different States, yet one identity only,	  Thou varied chain of different States, yet one identity only,
  A special song before I go I'd sing o'er all the rest,	  A special song before I go I'd sing o'er all the rest,	  A special song before I go I'd sing o'er all the rest,	  A special song before I go I'd sing o'er all the rest,
  For thee, the future.	  For thee, the future.	  For thee, the future.	  For thee, the future.
			
  I'd sow a seed for thee of endless Nationality,	  I'd sow a seed for thee of endless Nationality,	  I'd sow a seed for thee of endless Nationality,	  I'd sow a seed for thee of endless Nationality,
  I'd fashion thy ensemble including body and soul,	  I'd fashion thy ensemble including body and soul,	  I'd fashion thy ensemble including body and soul,	  I'd fashion thy ensemble including body and soul,
  I'd show away ahead thy real Union, and how it may be accomplish'd.	  I'd show away ahead thy real Union, and how it may be accomplish'd.	  I'd show away ahead thy real Union, and how it may be accomplish'd.	  I'd show away ahead thy real Union, and how it may be accomplish'd.
			
  The paths to the house I seek to make,	  The paths to the house I seek to make,	  The paths to the house I seek to make,	  The paths to the house I seek to make,
  But leave to those to come the house itself.	  But leave to those to come the house itself.	  But leave to those to come the house itself.	  But leave to those to come the house itself.
			
  Belief I sing, and preparation;	  Belief I sing, and preparation;	  Belief I sing, and preparation;	  Belief I sing, and preparation;
  As Life and Nature are not great with reference to the present only,	  As Life and Nature are not great with reference to the present only,	  As Life and Nature are not great with reference to the present only,	  As Life and Nature are not great with reference to the present only,
  But greater still from what is yet to come,	  But greater still from what is yet to come,	  But greater still from what is yet to come,	  But greater still from what is yet to come,
  Out of that formula for thee I sing.	  Out of that formula for thee I sing.	  Out of that formula for thee I sing.	  Out of that formula for thee I sing.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  As a strong bird on pinions free,	  As a strong bird on pinions free,	  As a strong bird on pinions free,	  As a strong bird on pinions free,
  Joyous, the amplest spaces heavenward cleaving,	  Joyous, the amplest spaces heavenward cleaving,	  Joyous, the amplest spaces heavenward cleaving,	  Joyous, the amplest spaces heavenward cleaving,
  Such be the thought I'd think of thee America,	  Such be the thought I'd think of thee America,	  Such be the thought I'd think of thee America,	  Such be the thought I'd think of thee America,
  Such be the recitative I'd bring for thee.	  Such be the recitative I'd bring for thee.	  Such be the recitative I'd bring for thee.	  Such be the recitative I'd bring for thee.
			
  The conceits of the poets of other lands I'd bring thee not,	  The conceits of the poets of other lands I'd bring thee not,	  The conceits of the poets of other lands I'd bring thee not,	  The conceits of the poets of other lands I'd bring thee not,
  Nor the compliments that have served their turn so long,	  Nor the compliments that have served their turn so long,	  Nor the compliments that have served their turn so long,	  Nor the compliments that have served their turn so long,
  Nor rhyme, nor the classics, nor perfume of foreign court or indoor	  Nor rhyme, nor the classics, nor perfume of foreign court or indoor	  Nor rhyme, nor the classics, nor perfume of foreign court or indoor	  Nor rhyme, nor the classics, nor perfume of foreign court or indoor
      library;	      library;	      library;	      library;
  But an odor I'd bring as from forests of pine in Maine, or breath of	  But an odor I'd bring as from forests of pine in Maine, or breath of	  But an odor I'd bring as from forests of pine in Maine, or breath of	  But an odor I'd bring as from forests of pine in Maine, or breath of
      an Illinois prairie,	      an Illinois prairie,	      an Illinois prairie,	      an Illinois prairie,
  With open airs of Virginia or Georgia or Tennessee, or from Texas	  With open airs of Virginia or Georgia or Tennessee, or from Texas	  With open airs of Virginia or Georgia or Tennessee, or from Texas	  With open airs of Virginia or Georgia or Tennessee, or from Texas
      uplands, or Florida's glades,	      uplands, or Florida's glades,	      uplands, or Florida's glades,	      uplands, or Florida's glades,
  Or the Saguenay's black stream, or the wide blue spread of Huron,	  Or the Saguenay's black stream, or the wide blue spread of Huron,	  Or the Saguenay's black stream, or the wide blue spread of Huron,	  Or the Saguenay's black stream, or the wide blue spread of Huron,
  With presentment of Yellowstone's scenes, or Yosemite,	  With presentment of Yellowstone's scenes, or Yosemite,	  With presentment of Yellowstone's scenes, or Yosemite,	  With presentment of Yellowstone's scenes, or Yosemite,
  And murmuring under, pervading all, I'd bring the rustling sea-sound,	  And murmuring under, pervading all, I'd bring the rustling sea-sound,	  And murmuring under, pervading all, I'd bring the rustling sea-sound,	  And murmuring under, pervading all, I'd bring the rustling sea-sound,
  That endlessly sounds from the two Great Seas of the world.	  That endlessly sounds from the two Great Seas of the world.	  That endlessly sounds from the two Great Seas of the world.	  That endlessly sounds from the two Great Seas of the world.
			
  And for thy subtler sense subtler refrains dread Mother,	  And for thy subtler sense subtler refrains dread Mother,	  And for thy subtler sense subtler refrains dread Mother,	  And for thy subtler sense subtler refrains dread Mother,
  Preludes of intellect tallying these and thee, mind-formulas fitted	  Preludes of intellect tallying these and thee, mind-formulas fitted	  Preludes of intellect tallying these and thee, mind-formulas fitted	  Preludes of intellect tallying these and thee, mind-formulas fitted
      for thee, real and sane and large as these and thee,	      for thee, real and sane and large as these and thee,	      for thee, real and sane and large as these and thee,	      for thee, real and sane and large as these and thee,
  Thou! mounting higher, diving deeper than we knew, thou	  Thou! mounting higher, diving deeper than we knew, thou	  Thou! mounting higher, diving deeper than we knew, thou	  Thou! mounting higher, diving deeper than we knew, thou
      transcendental Union!	      transcendental Union!	      transcendental Union!	      transcendental Union!
  By thee fact to be justified, blended with thought,	  By thee fact to be justified, blended with thought,	  By thee fact to be justified, blended with thought,	  By thee fact to be justified, blended with thought,
  Thought of man justified, blended with God,	  Thought of man justified, blended with God,	  Thought of man justified, blended with God,	  Thought of man justified, blended with God,
  Through thy idea, lo, the immortal reality!	  Through thy idea, lo, the immortal reality!	  Through thy idea, lo, the immortal reality!	  Through thy idea, lo, the immortal reality!
  Through thy reality, lo, the immortal idea!	  Through thy reality, lo, the immortal idea!	  Through thy reality, lo, the immortal idea!	  Through thy reality, lo, the immortal idea!
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Brain of the New World, what a task is thine,	  Brain of the New World, what a task is thine,	  Brain of the New World, what a task is thine,	  Brain of the New World, what a task is thine,
  To formulate the Modern--out of the peerless grandeur of the modern,	  To formulate the Modern--out of the peerless grandeur of the modern,	  To formulate the Modern--out of the peerless grandeur of the modern,	  To formulate the Modern--out of the peerless grandeur of the modern,
  Out of thyself, comprising science, to recast poems, churches, art,	  Out of thyself, comprising science, to recast poems, churches, art,	  Out of thyself, comprising science, to recast poems, churches, art,	  Out of thyself, comprising science, to recast poems, churches, art,
  (Recast, may-be discard them, end them--maybe their work is done,	  (Recast, may-be discard them, end them--maybe their work is done,	  (Recast, may-be discard them, end them--maybe their work is done,	  (Recast, may-be discard them, end them--maybe their work is done,
      who knows?)	      who knows?)	      who knows?)	      who knows?)
  By vision, hand, conception, on the background of the mighty past, the dead,	  By vision, hand, conception, on the background of the mighty past, the dead,	  By vision, hand, conception, on the background of the mighty past, the dead,	  By vision, hand, conception, on the background of the mighty past, the dead,
  To limn with absolute faith the mighty living present.	  To limn with absolute faith the mighty living present.	  To limn with absolute faith the mighty living present.	  To limn with absolute faith the mighty living present.
			
  And yet thou living present brain, heir of the dead, the Old World brain,	  And yet thou living present brain, heir of the dead, the Old World brain,	  And yet thou living present brain, heir of the dead, the Old World brain,	  And yet thou living present brain, heir of the dead, the Old World brain,
  Thou that lay folded like an unborn babe within its folds so long,	  Thou that lay folded like an unborn babe within its folds so long,	  Thou that lay folded like an unborn babe within its folds so long,	  Thou that lay folded like an unborn babe within its folds so long,
  Thou carefully prepared by it so long--haply thou but unfoldest it,	  Thou carefully prepared by it so long--haply thou but unfoldest it,	  Thou carefully prepared by it so long--haply thou but unfoldest it,	  Thou carefully prepared by it so long--haply thou but unfoldest it,
      only maturest it,	      only maturest it,	      only maturest it,	      only maturest it,
  It to eventuate in thee--the essence of the by-gone time contain'd in thee,	  It to eventuate in thee--the essence of the by-gone time contain'd in thee,	  It to eventuate in thee--the essence of the by-gone time contain'd in thee,	  It to eventuate in thee--the essence of the by-gone time contain'd in thee,
  Its poems, churches, arts, unwitting to themselves, destined with	  Its poems, churches, arts, unwitting to themselves, destined with	  Its poems, churches, arts, unwitting to themselves, destined with	  Its poems, churches, arts, unwitting to themselves, destined with
      reference to thee;	      reference to thee;	      reference to thee;	      reference to thee;
  Thou but the apples, long, long, long a-growing,	  Thou but the apples, long, long, long a-growing,	  Thou but the apples, long, long, long a-growing,	  Thou but the apples, long, long, long a-growing,
  The fruit of all the Old ripening to-day in thee.	  The fruit of all the Old ripening to-day in thee.	  The fruit of all the Old ripening to-day in thee.	  The fruit of all the Old ripening to-day in thee.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Sail, sail thy best, ship of Democracy,	  Sail, sail thy best, ship of Democracy,	  Sail, sail thy best, ship of Democracy,	  Sail, sail thy best, ship of Democracy,
  Of value is thy freight, 'tis not the Present only,	  Of value is thy freight, 'tis not the Present only,	  Of value is thy freight, 'tis not the Present only,	  Of value is thy freight, 'tis not the Present only,
  The Past is also stored in thee,	  The Past is also stored in thee,	  The Past is also stored in thee,	  The Past is also stored in thee,
  Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not of the Western	  Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not of the Western	  Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not of the Western	  Thou holdest not the venture of thyself alone, not of the Western
      continent alone,	      continent alone,	      continent alone,	      continent alone,
  Earth's resume entire floats on thy keel O ship, is steadied by thy spars,	  Earth's resume entire floats on thy keel O ship, is steadied by thy spars,	  Earth's resume entire floats on thy keel O ship, is steadied by thy spars,	  Earth's resume entire floats on thy keel O ship, is steadied by thy spars,
  With thee Time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or	  With thee Time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or	  With thee Time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or	  With thee Time voyages in trust, the antecedent nations sink or
      swim with thee,	      swim with thee,	      swim with thee,	      swim with thee,
  With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars, thou	  With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars, thou	  With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars, thou	  With all their ancient struggles, martyrs, heroes, epics, wars, thou
      bear'st the other continents,	      bear'st the other continents,	      bear'st the other continents,	      bear'st the other continents,
  Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant;	  Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant;	  Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant;	  Theirs, theirs as much as thine, the destination-port triumphant;
  Steer then with good strong hand and wary eye O helmsman, thou	  Steer then with good strong hand and wary eye O helmsman, thou	  Steer then with good strong hand and wary eye O helmsman, thou	  Steer then with good strong hand and wary eye O helmsman, thou
      carriest great companions,	      carriest great companions,	      carriest great companions,	      carriest great companions,
  Venerable priestly Asia sails this day with thee,	  Venerable priestly Asia sails this day with thee,	  Venerable priestly Asia sails this day with thee,	  Venerable priestly Asia sails this day with thee,
  And royal feudal Europe sails with thee.	  And royal feudal Europe sails with thee.	  And royal feudal Europe sails with thee.	  And royal feudal Europe sails with thee.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Beautiful world of new superber birth that rises to my eyes,	  Beautiful world of new superber birth that rises to my eyes,	  Beautiful world of new superber birth that rises to my eyes,	  Beautiful world of new superber birth that rises to my eyes,
  Like a limitless golden cloud filling the westernr sky,	  Like a limitless golden cloud filling the westernr sky,	  Like a limitless golden cloud filling the westernr sky,	  Like a limitless golden cloud filling the westernr sky,
  Emblem of general maternity lifted above all,	  Emblem of general maternity lifted above all,	  Emblem of general maternity lifted above all,	  Emblem of general maternity lifted above all,
  Sacred shape of the bearer of daughters and sons,	  Sacred shape of the bearer of daughters and sons,	  Sacred shape of the bearer of daughters and sons,	  Sacred shape of the bearer of daughters and sons,
  Out of thy teeming womb thy giant babes in ceaseless procession issuing,	  Out of thy teeming womb thy giant babes in ceaseless procession issuing,	  Out of thy teeming womb thy giant babes in ceaseless procession issuing,	  Out of thy teeming womb thy giant babes in ceaseless procession issuing,
  Acceding from such gestation, taking and giving continual strength	  Acceding from such gestation, taking and giving continual strength	  Acceding from such gestation, taking and giving continual strength	  Acceding from such gestation, taking and giving continual strength
      and life,	      and life,	      and life,	      and life,
  World of the real--world of the twain in one,	  World of the real--world of the twain in one,	  World of the real--world of the twain in one,	  World of the real--world of the twain in one,
  World of the soul, born by the world of the real alone, led to	  World of the soul, born by the world of the real alone, led to	  World of the soul, born by the world of the real alone, led to	  World of the soul, born by the world of the real alone, led to
      identity, body, by it alone,	      identity, body, by it alone,	      identity, body, by it alone,	      identity, body, by it alone,
  Yet in beginning only, incalculable masses of composite precious materials,	  Yet in beginning only, incalculable masses of composite precious materials,	  Yet in beginning only, incalculable masses of composite precious materials,	  Yet in beginning only, incalculable masses of composite precious materials,
  By history's cycles forwarded, by every nation, language, hither sent,	  By history's cycles forwarded, by every nation, language, hither sent,	  By history's cycles forwarded, by every nation, language, hither sent,	  By history's cycles forwarded, by every nation, language, hither sent,
  Ready, collected here, a freer, vast, electric world, to be	  Ready, collected here, a freer, vast, electric world, to be	  Ready, collected here, a freer, vast, electric world, to be	  Ready, collected here, a freer, vast, electric world, to be
      constructed here,	      constructed here,	      constructed here,	      constructed here,
  (The true New World, the world of orbic science, morals, literatures	  (The true New World, the world of orbic science, morals, literatures	  (The true New World, the world of orbic science, morals, literatures	  (The true New World, the world of orbic science, morals, literatures
      to come,)	      to come,)	      to come,)	      to come,)
  Thou wonder world yet undefined, unform'd, neither do I define thee,	  Thou wonder world yet undefined, unform'd, neither do I define thee,	  Thou wonder world yet undefined, unform'd, neither do I define thee,	  Thou wonder world yet undefined, unform'd, neither do I define thee,
  How can I pierce the impenetrable blank of the future?	  How can I pierce the impenetrable blank of the future?	  How can I pierce the impenetrable blank of the future?	  How can I pierce the impenetrable blank of the future?
  I feel thy ominous greatness evil as well as good,	  I feel thy ominous greatness evil as well as good,	  I feel thy ominous greatness evil as well as good,	  I feel thy ominous greatness evil as well as good,
  I watch thee advancing, absorbing the present, transcending the past,	  I watch thee advancing, absorbing the present, transcending the past,	  I watch thee advancing, absorbing the present, transcending the past,	  I watch thee advancing, absorbing the present, transcending the past,
  I see thy light lighting, and thy shadow shadowing, as if the entire globe,	  I see thy light lighting, and thy shadow shadowing, as if the entire globe,	  I see thy light lighting, and thy shadow shadowing, as if the entire globe,	  I see thy light lighting, and thy shadow shadowing, as if the entire globe,
  But I do not undertake to define thee, hardly to comprehend thee,	  But I do not undertake to define thee, hardly to comprehend thee,	  But I do not undertake to define thee, hardly to comprehend thee,	  But I do not undertake to define thee, hardly to comprehend thee,
  I but thee name, thee prophesy, as now,	  I but thee name, thee prophesy, as now,	  I but thee name, thee prophesy, as now,	  I but thee name, thee prophesy, as now,
  I merely thee ejaculate!	  I merely thee ejaculate!	  I merely thee ejaculate!	  I merely thee ejaculate!
			
  Thee in thy future,	  Thee in thy future,	  Thee in thy future,	  Thee in thy future,
  Thee in thy only permanent life, career, thy own unloosen'd mind,	  Thee in thy only permanent life, career, thy own unloosen'd mind,	  Thee in thy only permanent life, career, thy own unloosen'd mind,	  Thee in thy only permanent life, career, thy own unloosen'd mind,
      thy soaring spirit,	      thy soaring spirit,	      thy soaring spirit,	      thy soaring spirit,
  Thee as another equally needed sun, radiant, ablaze, swift-moving,	  Thee as another equally needed sun, radiant, ablaze, swift-moving,	  Thee as another equally needed sun, radiant, ablaze, swift-moving,	  Thee as another equally needed sun, radiant, ablaze, swift-moving,
      fructifying all,	      fructifying all,	      fructifying all,	      fructifying all,
  Thee risen in potent cheerfulness and joy, in endless great hilarity,	  Thee risen in potent cheerfulness and joy, in endless great hilarity,	  Thee risen in potent cheerfulness and joy, in endless great hilarity,	  Thee risen in potent cheerfulness and joy, in endless great hilarity,
  Scattering for good the cloud that hung so long, that weigh'd so	  Scattering for good the cloud that hung so long, that weigh'd so	  Scattering for good the cloud that hung so long, that weigh'd so	  Scattering for good the cloud that hung so long, that weigh'd so
      long upon the mind of man,	      long upon the mind of man,	      long upon the mind of man,	      long upon the mind of man,
  The doubt, suspicion, dread, of gradual, certain decadence of man;	  The doubt, suspicion, dread, of gradual, certain decadence of man;	  The doubt, suspicion, dread, of gradual, certain decadence of man;	  The doubt, suspicion, dread, of gradual, certain decadence of man;
  Thee in thy larger, saner brood of female, male--thee in thy	  Thee in thy larger, saner brood of female, male--thee in thy	  Thee in thy larger, saner brood of female, male--thee in thy	  Thee in thy larger, saner brood of female, male--thee in thy
      athletes, moral, spiritual, South, North, West, East,	      athletes, moral, spiritual, South, North, West, East,	      athletes, moral, spiritual, South, North, West, East,	      athletes, moral, spiritual, South, North, West, East,
  (To thy immortal breasts, Mother of All, thy every daughter, son,	  (To thy immortal breasts, Mother of All, thy every daughter, son,	  (To thy immortal breasts, Mother of All, thy every daughter, son,	  (To thy immortal breasts, Mother of All, thy every daughter, son,
      endear'd alike, forever equal,)	      endear'd alike, forever equal,)	      endear'd alike, forever equal,)	      endear'd alike, forever equal,)
  Thee in thy own musicians, singers, artists, unborn yet, but certain,	  Thee in thy own musicians, singers, artists, unborn yet, but certain,	  Thee in thy own musicians, singers, artists, unborn yet, but certain,	  Thee in thy own musicians, singers, artists, unborn yet, but certain,
  Thee in thy moral wealth and civilization, (until which thy proudest	  Thee in thy moral wealth and civilization, (until which thy proudest	  Thee in thy moral wealth and civilization, (until which thy proudest	  Thee in thy moral wealth and civilization, (until which thy proudest
      material civilization must remain in vain,)	      material civilization must remain in vain,)	      material civilization must remain in vain,)	      material civilization must remain in vain,)
  Thee in thy all-supplying, all-enclosing worship--thee in no single	  Thee in thy all-supplying, all-enclosing worship--thee in no single	  Thee in thy all-supplying, all-enclosing worship--thee in no single	  Thee in thy all-supplying, all-enclosing worship--thee in no single
      bible, saviour, merely,	      bible, saviour, merely,	      bible, saviour, merely,	      bible, saviour, merely,
  Thy saviours countless, latent within thyself, thy bibles incessant	  Thy saviours countless, latent within thyself, thy bibles incessant	  Thy saviours countless, latent within thyself, thy bibles incessant	  Thy saviours countless, latent within thyself, thy bibles incessant
      within thyself, equal to any, divine as any,	      within thyself, equal to any, divine as any,	      within thyself, equal to any, divine as any,	      within thyself, equal to any, divine as any,
  (Thy soaring course thee formulating, not in thy two great wars, nor	  (Thy soaring course thee formulating, not in thy two great wars, nor	  (Thy soaring course thee formulating, not in thy two great wars, nor	  (Thy soaring course thee formulating, not in thy two great wars, nor
      in thy century's visible growth,	      in thy century's visible growth,	      in thy century's visible growth,	      in thy century's visible growth,
  But far more in these leaves and chants, thy chants, great Mother!)	  But far more in these leaves and chants, thy chants, great Mother!)	  But far more in these leaves and chants, thy chants, great Mother!)	  But far more in these leaves and chants, thy chants, great Mother!)
  Thee in an education grown of thee, in teachers, studies, students,	  Thee in an education grown of thee, in teachers, studies, students,	  Thee in an education grown of thee, in teachers, studies, students,	  Thee in an education grown of thee, in teachers, studies, students,
      born of thee,	      born of thee,	      born of thee,	      born of thee,
  Thee in thy democratic fetes en-masse, thy high original festivals,	  Thee in thy democratic fetes en-masse, thy high original festivals,	  Thee in thy democratic fetes en-masse, thy high original festivals,	  Thee in thy democratic fetes en-masse, thy high original festivals,
      operas, lecturers, preachers,	      operas, lecturers, preachers,	      operas, lecturers, preachers,	      operas, lecturers, preachers,
  Thee in thy ultimate, (the preparations only now completed, the	  Thee in thy ultimate, (the preparations only now completed, the	  Thee in thy ultimate, (the preparations only now completed, the	  Thee in thy ultimate, (the preparations only now completed, the
      edifice on sure foundations tied,)	      edifice on sure foundations tied,)	      edifice on sure foundations tied,)	      edifice on sure foundations tied,)
  Thee in thy pinnacles, intellect, thought, thy topmost rational	  Thee in thy pinnacles, intellect, thought, thy topmost rational	  Thee in thy pinnacles, intellect, thought, thy topmost rational	  Thee in thy pinnacles, intellect, thought, thy topmost rational
      joys, thy love and godlike aspiration,	      joys, thy love and godlike aspiration,	      joys, thy love and godlike aspiration,	      joys, thy love and godlike aspiration,
  In thy resplendent coming literati, thy full-lung'd orators, thy	  In thy resplendent coming literati, thy full-lung'd orators, thy	  In thy resplendent coming literati, thy full-lung'd orators, thy	  In thy resplendent coming literati, thy full-lung'd orators, thy
      sacerdotal bards, kosmic savans,	      sacerdotal bards, kosmic savans,	      sacerdotal bards, kosmic savans,	      sacerdotal bards, kosmic savans,
  These! these in thee, (certain to come,) to-day I prophesy.	  These! these in thee, (certain to come,) to-day I prophesy.	  These! these in thee, (certain to come,) to-day I prophesy.	  These! these in thee, (certain to come,) to-day I prophesy.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Land tolerating all, accepting all, not for the good alone, all good	  Land tolerating all, accepting all, not for the good alone, all good	  Land tolerating all, accepting all, not for the good alone, all good	  Land tolerating all, accepting all, not for the good alone, all good
      for thee,	      for thee,	      for thee,	      for thee,
  Land in the realms of God to be a realm unto thyself,	  Land in the realms of God to be a realm unto thyself,	  Land in the realms of God to be a realm unto thyself,	  Land in the realms of God to be a realm unto thyself,
  Under the rule of God to be a rule unto thyself.	  Under the rule of God to be a rule unto thyself.	  Under the rule of God to be a rule unto thyself.	  Under the rule of God to be a rule unto thyself.
			
  (Lo, where arise three peerless stars,	  (Lo, where arise three peerless stars,	  (Lo, where arise three peerless stars,	  (Lo, where arise three peerless stars,
  To be thy natal stars my country, Ensemble, Evolution, Freedom,	  To be thy natal stars my country, Ensemble, Evolution, Freedom,	  To be thy natal stars my country, Ensemble, Evolution, Freedom,	  To be thy natal stars my country, Ensemble, Evolution, Freedom,
  Set in the sky of Law.)	  Set in the sky of Law.)	  Set in the sky of Law.)	  Set in the sky of Law.)
			
  Land of unprecedented faith, God's faith,	  Land of unprecedented faith, God's faith,	  Land of unprecedented faith, God's faith,	  Land of unprecedented faith, God's faith,
  Thy soil, thy very subsoil, all upheav'd,	  Thy soil, thy very subsoil, all upheav'd,	  Thy soil, thy very subsoil, all upheav'd,	  Thy soil, thy very subsoil, all upheav'd,
  The general inner earth so long so sedulously draped over, now hence	  The general inner earth so long so sedulously draped over, now hence	  The general inner earth so long so sedulously draped over, now hence	  The general inner earth so long so sedulously draped over, now hence
      for what it is boldly laid bare,	      for what it is boldly laid bare,	      for what it is boldly laid bare,	      for what it is boldly laid bare,
  Open'd by thee to heaven's light for benefit or bale.	  Open'd by thee to heaven's light for benefit or bale.	  Open'd by thee to heaven's light for benefit or bale.	  Open'd by thee to heaven's light for benefit or bale.
			
  Not for success alone,	  Not for success alone,	  Not for success alone,	  Not for success alone,
  Not to fair-sail unintermitted always,	  Not to fair-sail unintermitted always,	  Not to fair-sail unintermitted always,	  Not to fair-sail unintermitted always,
  The storm shall dash thy face, the murk of war and worse than war	  The storm shall dash thy face, the murk of war and worse than war	  The storm shall dash thy face, the murk of war and worse than war	  The storm shall dash thy face, the murk of war and worse than war
      shall cover thee all over,	      shall cover thee all over,	      shall cover thee all over,	      shall cover thee all over,
  (Wert capable of war, its tug and trials? be capable of peace, its trials,	  (Wert capable of war, its tug and trials? be capable of peace, its trials,	  (Wert capable of war, its tug and trials? be capable of peace, its trials,	  (Wert capable of war, its tug and trials? be capable of peace, its trials,
  For the tug and mortal strain of nations come at last in prosperous	  For the tug and mortal strain of nations come at last in prosperous	  For the tug and mortal strain of nations come at last in prosperous	  For the tug and mortal strain of nations come at last in prosperous
      peace, not war;)	      peace, not war;)	      peace, not war;)	      peace, not war;)
  In many a smiling mask death shall approach beguiling thee, thou in	  In many a smiling mask death shall approach beguiling thee, thou in	  In many a smiling mask death shall approach beguiling thee, thou in	  In many a smiling mask death shall approach beguiling thee, thou in
      disease shalt swelter,	      disease shalt swelter,	      disease shalt swelter,	      disease shalt swelter,
  The livid cancer spread its hideous claws, clinging upon thy	  The livid cancer spread its hideous claws, clinging upon thy	  The livid cancer spread its hideous claws, clinging upon thy	  The livid cancer spread its hideous claws, clinging upon thy
      breasts, seeking to strike thee deep within,	      breasts, seeking to strike thee deep within,	      breasts, seeking to strike thee deep within,	      breasts, seeking to strike thee deep within,
  Consumption of the worst, moral consumption, shall rouge thy face	  Consumption of the worst, moral consumption, shall rouge thy face	  Consumption of the worst, moral consumption, shall rouge thy face	  Consumption of the worst, moral consumption, shall rouge thy face
      with hectic,	      with hectic,	      with hectic,	      with hectic,
  But thou shalt face thy fortunes, thy diseases, and surmount them all,	  But thou shalt face thy fortunes, thy diseases, and surmount them all,	  But thou shalt face thy fortunes, thy diseases, and surmount them all,	  But thou shalt face thy fortunes, thy diseases, and surmount them all,
  Whatever they are to-day and whatever through time they may be,	  Whatever they are to-day and whatever through time they may be,	  Whatever they are to-day and whatever through time they may be,	  Whatever they are to-day and whatever through time they may be,
  They each and all shall lift and pass away and cease from thee,	  They each and all shall lift and pass away and cease from thee,	  They each and all shall lift and pass away and cease from thee,	  They each and all shall lift and pass away and cease from thee,
  While thou, Time's spirals rounding, out of thyself, thyself still	  While thou, Time's spirals rounding, out of thyself, thyself still	  While thou, Time's spirals rounding, out of thyself, thyself still	  While thou, Time's spirals rounding, out of thyself, thyself still
      extricating, fusing,	      extricating, fusing,	      extricating, fusing,	      extricating, fusing,
  Equable, natural, mystical Union thou, (the mortal with immortal blent,)	  Equable, natural, mystical Union thou, (the mortal with immortal blent,)	  Equable, natural, mystical Union thou, (the mortal with immortal blent,)	  Equable, natural, mystical Union thou, (the mortal with immortal blent,)
  Shalt soar toward the fulfilment of the future, the spirit of the	  Shalt soar toward the fulfilment of the future, the spirit of the	  Shalt soar toward the fulfilment of the future, the spirit of the	  Shalt soar toward the fulfilment of the future, the spirit of the
      body and the mind,	      body and the mind,	      body and the mind,	      body and the mind,
  The soul, its destinies.	  The soul, its destinies.	  The soul, its destinies.	  The soul, its destinies.
			
  The soul, its destinies, the real real,	  The soul, its destinies, the real real,	  The soul, its destinies, the real real,	  The soul, its destinies, the real real,
  (Purport of all these apparitions of the real;)	  (Purport of all these apparitions of the real;)	  (Purport of all these apparitions of the real;)	  (Purport of all these apparitions of the real;)
  In thee America, the soul, its destinies,	  In thee America, the soul, its destinies,	  In thee America, the soul, its destinies,	  In thee America, the soul, its destinies,
  Thou globe of globes! thou wonder nebulous!	  Thou globe of globes! thou wonder nebulous!	  Thou globe of globes! thou wonder nebulous!	  Thou globe of globes! thou wonder nebulous!
  By many a throe of heat and cold convuls'd, (by these thyself solidifying,)	  By many a throe of heat and cold convuls'd, (by these thyself solidifying,)	  By many a throe of heat and cold convuls'd, (by these thyself solidifying,)	  By many a throe of heat and cold convuls'd, (by these thyself solidifying,)
  Thou mental, moral orb--thou New, indeed new, Spiritual World!	  Thou mental, moral orb--thou New, indeed new, Spiritual World!	  Thou mental, moral orb--thou New, indeed new, Spiritual World!	  Thou mental, moral orb--thou New, indeed new, Spiritual World!
  The Present holds thee not--for such vast growth as thine,	  The Present holds thee not--for such vast growth as thine,	  The Present holds thee not--for such vast growth as thine,	  The Present holds thee not--for such vast growth as thine,
  For such unparallel'd flight as thine, such brood as thine,	  For such unparallel'd flight as thine, such brood as thine,	  For such unparallel'd flight as thine, such brood as thine,	  For such unparallel'd flight as thine, such brood as thine,
  The FUTURE only holds thee and can hold thee.	  The FUTURE only holds thee and can hold thee.	  The FUTURE only holds thee and can hold thee.	  The FUTURE only holds thee and can hold thee.
			
			
			
			
A Paumanok Picture	A Paumanok Picture	A Paumanok Picture	A Paumanok Picture
			
  Two boats with nets lying off the sea-beach, quite still,	  Two boats with nets lying off the sea-beach, quite still,	  Two boats with nets lying off the sea-beach, quite still,	  Two boats with nets lying off the sea-beach, quite still,
  Ten fishermen waiting--they discover a thick school of mossbonkers	  Ten fishermen waiting--they discover a thick school of mossbonkers	  Ten fishermen waiting--they discover a thick school of mossbonkers	  Ten fishermen waiting--they discover a thick school of mossbonkers
      --they drop the join'd seine-ends in the water,	      --they drop the join'd seine-ends in the water,	      --they drop the join'd seine-ends in the water,	      --they drop the join'd seine-ends in the water,
  The boats separate and row off, each on its rounding course to the	  The boats separate and row off, each on its rounding course to the	  The boats separate and row off, each on its rounding course to the	  The boats separate and row off, each on its rounding course to the
      beach, enclosing the mossbonkers,	      beach, enclosing the mossbonkers,	      beach, enclosing the mossbonkers,	      beach, enclosing the mossbonkers,
  The net is drawn in by a windlass by those who stop ashore,	  The net is drawn in by a windlass by those who stop ashore,	  The net is drawn in by a windlass by those who stop ashore,	  The net is drawn in by a windlass by those who stop ashore,
  Some of the fishermen lounge in their boats, others stand	  Some of the fishermen lounge in their boats, others stand	  Some of the fishermen lounge in their boats, others stand	  Some of the fishermen lounge in their boats, others stand
      ankle-deep in the water, pois'd on strong legs,	      ankle-deep in the water, pois'd on strong legs,	      ankle-deep in the water, pois'd on strong legs,	      ankle-deep in the water, pois'd on strong legs,
  The boats partly drawn up, the water slapping against them,	  The boats partly drawn up, the water slapping against them,	  The boats partly drawn up, the water slapping against them,	  The boats partly drawn up, the water slapping against them,
  Strew'd on the sand in heaps and windrows, well out from the water,	  Strew'd on the sand in heaps and windrows, well out from the water,	  Strew'd on the sand in heaps and windrows, well out from the water,	  Strew'd on the sand in heaps and windrows, well out from the water,
      the green-back'd spotted mossbonkers.	      the green-back'd spotted mossbonkers.	      the green-back'd spotted mossbonkers.	      the green-back'd spotted mossbonkers.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXXII.  FROM NOON TO STARRY NIGHT	BOOK XXXII.  FROM NOON TO STARRY NIGHT	BOOK XXXII.  FROM NOON TO STARRY NIGHT	BOOK XXXII.  FROM NOON TO STARRY NIGHT
			
			
Thou Orb Aloft Full-Dazzling	Thou Orb Aloft Full-Dazzling	Thou Orb Aloft Full-Dazzling	Thou Orb Aloft Full-Dazzling
			
  Thou orb aloft full-dazzling! thou hot October noon!	  Thou orb aloft full-dazzling! thou hot October noon!	  Thou orb aloft full-dazzling! thou hot October noon!	  Thou orb aloft full-dazzling! thou hot October noon!
  Flooding with sheeny light the gray beach sand,	  Flooding with sheeny light the gray beach sand,	  Flooding with sheeny light the gray beach sand,	  Flooding with sheeny light the gray beach sand,
  The sibilant near sea with vistas far and foam,	  The sibilant near sea with vistas far and foam,	  The sibilant near sea with vistas far and foam,	  The sibilant near sea with vistas far and foam,
  And tawny streaks and shades and spreading blue;	  And tawny streaks and shades and spreading blue;	  And tawny streaks and shades and spreading blue;	  And tawny streaks and shades and spreading blue;
  O sun of noon refulgent! my special word to thee.	  O sun of noon refulgent! my special word to thee.	  O sun of noon refulgent! my special word to thee.	  O sun of noon refulgent! my special word to thee.
			
  Hear me illustrious!	  Hear me illustrious!	  Hear me illustrious!	  Hear me illustrious!
  Thy lover me, for always I have loved thee,	  Thy lover me, for always I have loved thee,	  Thy lover me, for always I have loved thee,	  Thy lover me, for always I have loved thee,
  Even as basking babe, then happy boy alone by some wood edge, thy	  Even as basking babe, then happy boy alone by some wood edge, thy	  Even as basking babe, then happy boy alone by some wood edge, thy	  Even as basking babe, then happy boy alone by some wood edge, thy
      touching-distant beams enough,	      touching-distant beams enough,	      touching-distant beams enough,	      touching-distant beams enough,
  Or man matured, or young or old, as now to thee I launch my invocation.	  Or man matured, or young or old, as now to thee I launch my invocation.	  Or man matured, or young or old, as now to thee I launch my invocation.	  Or man matured, or young or old, as now to thee I launch my invocation.
			
  (Thou canst not with thy dumbness me deceive,	  (Thou canst not with thy dumbness me deceive,	  (Thou canst not with thy dumbness me deceive,	  (Thou canst not with thy dumbness me deceive,
  I know before the fitting man all Nature yields,	  I know before the fitting man all Nature yields,	  I know before the fitting man all Nature yields,	  I know before the fitting man all Nature yields,
  Though answering not in words, the skies, trees, hear his voice--and	  Though answering not in words, the skies, trees, hear his voice--and	  Though answering not in words, the skies, trees, hear his voice--and	  Though answering not in words, the skies, trees, hear his voice--and
      thou O sun,	      thou O sun,	      thou O sun,	      thou O sun,
  As for thy throes, thy perturbations, sudden breaks and shafts of	  As for thy throes, thy perturbations, sudden breaks and shafts of	  As for thy throes, thy perturbations, sudden breaks and shafts of	  As for thy throes, thy perturbations, sudden breaks and shafts of
      flame gigantic,	      flame gigantic,	      flame gigantic,	      flame gigantic,
  I understand them, I know those flames, those perturbations well.)	  I understand them, I know those flames, those perturbations well.)	  I understand them, I know those flames, those perturbations well.)	  I understand them, I know those flames, those perturbations well.)
			
  Thou that with fructifying heat and light,	  Thou that with fructifying heat and light,	  Thou that with fructifying heat and light,	  Thou that with fructifying heat and light,
  O'er myriad farms, o'er lands and waters North and South,	  O'er myriad farms, o'er lands and waters North and South,	  O'er myriad farms, o'er lands and waters North and South,	  O'er myriad farms, o'er lands and waters North and South,
  O'er Mississippi's endless course, o'er Texas' grassy plains,	  O'er Mississippi's endless course, o'er Texas' grassy plains,	  O'er Mississippi's endless course, o'er Texas' grassy plains,	  O'er Mississippi's endless course, o'er Texas' grassy plains,
      Kanada's woods,	      Kanada's woods,	      Kanada's woods,	      Kanada's woods,
  O'er all the globe that turns its face to thee shining in space,	  O'er all the globe that turns its face to thee shining in space,	  O'er all the globe that turns its face to thee shining in space,	  O'er all the globe that turns its face to thee shining in space,
  Thou that impartially enfoldest all, not only continents, seas,	  Thou that impartially enfoldest all, not only continents, seas,	  Thou that impartially enfoldest all, not only continents, seas,	  Thou that impartially enfoldest all, not only continents, seas,
  Thou that to grapes and weeds and little wild flowers givest so liberally,	  Thou that to grapes and weeds and little wild flowers givest so liberally,	  Thou that to grapes and weeds and little wild flowers givest so liberally,	  Thou that to grapes and weeds and little wild flowers givest so liberally,
  Shed, shed thyself on mine and me, with but a fleeting ray out of	  Shed, shed thyself on mine and me, with but a fleeting ray out of	  Shed, shed thyself on mine and me, with but a fleeting ray out of	  Shed, shed thyself on mine and me, with but a fleeting ray out of
      thy million millions,	      thy million millions,	      thy million millions,	      thy million millions,
  Strike through these chants.	  Strike through these chants.	  Strike through these chants.	  Strike through these chants.
			
  Nor only launch thy subtle dazzle and thy strength for these,	  Nor only launch thy subtle dazzle and thy strength for these,	  Nor only launch thy subtle dazzle and thy strength for these,	  Nor only launch thy subtle dazzle and thy strength for these,
  Prepare the later afternoon of me myself--prepare my lengthening shadows,	  Prepare the later afternoon of me myself--prepare my lengthening shadows,	  Prepare the later afternoon of me myself--prepare my lengthening shadows,	  Prepare the later afternoon of me myself--prepare my lengthening shadows,
  Prepare my starry nights.	  Prepare my starry nights.	  Prepare my starry nights.	  Prepare my starry nights.
			
			
			
			
Faces	Faces	Faces	Faces
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Sauntering the pavement or riding the country by-road, faces!	  Sauntering the pavement or riding the country by-road, faces!	  Sauntering the pavement or riding the country by-road, faces!	  Sauntering the pavement or riding the country by-road, faces!
  Faces of friendship, precision, caution, suavity, ideality,	  Faces of friendship, precision, caution, suavity, ideality,	  Faces of friendship, precision, caution, suavity, ideality,	  Faces of friendship, precision, caution, suavity, ideality,
  The spiritual-prescient face, the always welcome common benevolent face,	  The spiritual-prescient face, the always welcome common benevolent face,	  The spiritual-prescient face, the always welcome common benevolent face,	  The spiritual-prescient face, the always welcome common benevolent face,
  The face of the singing of music, the grand faces of natural lawyers	  The face of the singing of music, the grand faces of natural lawyers	  The face of the singing of music, the grand faces of natural lawyers	  The face of the singing of music, the grand faces of natural lawyers
      and judges broad at the back-top,	      and judges broad at the back-top,	      and judges broad at the back-top,	      and judges broad at the back-top,
  The faces of hunters and fishers bulged at the brows, the shaved	  The faces of hunters and fishers bulged at the brows, the shaved	  The faces of hunters and fishers bulged at the brows, the shaved	  The faces of hunters and fishers bulged at the brows, the shaved
      blanch'd faces of orthodox citizens,	      blanch'd faces of orthodox citizens,	      blanch'd faces of orthodox citizens,	      blanch'd faces of orthodox citizens,
  The pure, extravagant, yearning, questioning artist's face,	  The pure, extravagant, yearning, questioning artist's face,	  The pure, extravagant, yearning, questioning artist's face,	  The pure, extravagant, yearning, questioning artist's face,
  The ugly face of some beautiful soul, the handsome detested or	  The ugly face of some beautiful soul, the handsome detested or	  The ugly face of some beautiful soul, the handsome detested or	  The ugly face of some beautiful soul, the handsome detested or
      despised face,	      despised face,	      despised face,	      despised face,
  The sacred faces of infants, the illuminated face of the mother of	  The sacred faces of infants, the illuminated face of the mother of	  The sacred faces of infants, the illuminated face of the mother of	  The sacred faces of infants, the illuminated face of the mother of
      many children,	      many children,	      many children,	      many children,
  The face of an amour, the face of veneration,	  The face of an amour, the face of veneration,	  The face of an amour, the face of veneration,	  The face of an amour, the face of veneration,
  The face as of a dream, the face of an immobile rock,	  The face as of a dream, the face of an immobile rock,	  The face as of a dream, the face of an immobile rock,	  The face as of a dream, the face of an immobile rock,
  The face withdrawn of its good and bad, a castrated face,	  The face withdrawn of its good and bad, a castrated face,	  The face withdrawn of its good and bad, a castrated face,	  The face withdrawn of its good and bad, a castrated face,
  A wild hawk, his wings clipp'd by the clipper,	  A wild hawk, his wings clipp'd by the clipper,	  A wild hawk, his wings clipp'd by the clipper,	  A wild hawk, his wings clipp'd by the clipper,
  A stallion that yielded at last to the thongs and knife of the gelder.	  A stallion that yielded at last to the thongs and knife of the gelder.	  A stallion that yielded at last to the thongs and knife of the gelder.	  A stallion that yielded at last to the thongs and knife of the gelder.
			
  Sauntering the pavement thus, or crossing the ceaseless ferry, faces	  Sauntering the pavement thus, or crossing the ceaseless ferry, faces	  Sauntering the pavement thus, or crossing the ceaseless ferry, faces	  Sauntering the pavement thus, or crossing the ceaseless ferry, faces
      and faces and faces,	      and faces and faces,	      and faces and faces,	      and faces and faces,
  I see them and complain not, and am content with all.	  I see them and complain not, and am content with all.	  I see them and complain not, and am content with all.	  I see them and complain not, and am content with all.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Do you suppose I could be content with all if I thought them their	  Do you suppose I could be content with all if I thought them their	  Do you suppose I could be content with all if I thought them their	  Do you suppose I could be content with all if I thought them their
      own finale?	      own finale?	      own finale?	      own finale?
			
  This now is too lamentable a face for a man,	  This now is too lamentable a face for a man,	  This now is too lamentable a face for a man,	  This now is too lamentable a face for a man,
  Some abject louse asking leave to be, cringing for it,	  Some abject louse asking leave to be, cringing for it,	  Some abject louse asking leave to be, cringing for it,	  Some abject louse asking leave to be, cringing for it,
  Some milk-nosed maggot blessing what lets it wrig to its hole.	  Some milk-nosed maggot blessing what lets it wrig to its hole.	  Some milk-nosed maggot blessing what lets it wrig to its hole.	  Some milk-nosed maggot blessing what lets it wrig to its hole.
			
  This face is a dog's snout sniffing for garbage,	  This face is a dog's snout sniffing for garbage,	  This face is a dog's snout sniffing for garbage,	  This face is a dog's snout sniffing for garbage,
  Snakes nest in that mouth, I hear the sibilant threat.	  Snakes nest in that mouth, I hear the sibilant threat.	  Snakes nest in that mouth, I hear the sibilant threat.	  Snakes nest in that mouth, I hear the sibilant threat.
			
  This face is a haze more chill than the arctic sea,	  This face is a haze more chill than the arctic sea,	  This face is a haze more chill than the arctic sea,	  This face is a haze more chill than the arctic sea,
  Its sleepy and wobbling icebergs crunch as they go.	  Its sleepy and wobbling icebergs crunch as they go.	  Its sleepy and wobbling icebergs crunch as they go.	  Its sleepy and wobbling icebergs crunch as they go.
			
  This is a face of bitter herbs, this an emetic, they need no label,	  This is a face of bitter herbs, this an emetic, they need no label,	  This is a face of bitter herbs, this an emetic, they need no label,	  This is a face of bitter herbs, this an emetic, they need no label,
  And more of the drug-shelf, laudanum, caoutchouc, or hog's-lard.	  And more of the drug-shelf, laudanum, caoutchouc, or hog's-lard.	  And more of the drug-shelf, laudanum, caoutchouc, or hog's-lard.	  And more of the drug-shelf, laudanum, caoutchouc, or hog's-lard.
			
  This face is an epilepsy, its wordless tongue gives out the unearthly cry,	  This face is an epilepsy, its wordless tongue gives out the unearthly cry,	  This face is an epilepsy, its wordless tongue gives out the unearthly cry,	  This face is an epilepsy, its wordless tongue gives out the unearthly cry,
  Its veins down the neck distend, its eyes roll till they show	  Its veins down the neck distend, its eyes roll till they show	  Its veins down the neck distend, its eyes roll till they show	  Its veins down the neck distend, its eyes roll till they show
      nothing but their whites,	      nothing but their whites,	      nothing but their whites,	      nothing but their whites,
  Its teeth grit, the palms of the hands are cut by the turn'd-in nails,	  Its teeth grit, the palms of the hands are cut by the turn'd-in nails,	  Its teeth grit, the palms of the hands are cut by the turn'd-in nails,	  Its teeth grit, the palms of the hands are cut by the turn'd-in nails,
  The man falls struggling and foaming to the ground, while he	  The man falls struggling and foaming to the ground, while he	  The man falls struggling and foaming to the ground, while he	  The man falls struggling and foaming to the ground, while he
      speculates well.	      speculates well.	      speculates well.	      speculates well.
			
  This face is bitten by vermin and worms,	  This face is bitten by vermin and worms,	  This face is bitten by vermin and worms,	  This face is bitten by vermin and worms,
  And this is some murderer's knife with a half-pull'd scabbard.	  And this is some murderer's knife with a half-pull'd scabbard.	  And this is some murderer's knife with a half-pull'd scabbard.	  And this is some murderer's knife with a half-pull'd scabbard.
			
  This face owes to the sexton his dismalest fee,	  This face owes to the sexton his dismalest fee,	  This face owes to the sexton his dismalest fee,	  This face owes to the sexton his dismalest fee,
  An unceasing death-bell tolls there.	  An unceasing death-bell tolls there.	  An unceasing death-bell tolls there.	  An unceasing death-bell tolls there.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Features of my equals would you trick me with your creas'd and	  Features of my equals would you trick me with your creas'd and	  Features of my equals would you trick me with your creas'd and	  Features of my equals would you trick me with your creas'd and
      cadaverous march?	      cadaverous march?	      cadaverous march?	      cadaverous march?
  Well, you cannot trick me.	  Well, you cannot trick me.	  Well, you cannot trick me.	  Well, you cannot trick me.
			
  I see your rounded never-erased flow,	  I see your rounded never-erased flow,	  I see your rounded never-erased flow,	  I see your rounded never-erased flow,
  I see 'neath the rims of your haggard and mean disguises.	  I see 'neath the rims of your haggard and mean disguises.	  I see 'neath the rims of your haggard and mean disguises.	  I see 'neath the rims of your haggard and mean disguises.
			
  Splay and twist as you like, poke with the tangling fores of fishes or rats,	  Splay and twist as you like, poke with the tangling fores of fishes or rats,	  Splay and twist as you like, poke with the tangling fores of fishes or rats,	  Splay and twist as you like, poke with the tangling fores of fishes or rats,
  You'll be unmuzzled, you certainly will.	  You'll be unmuzzled, you certainly will.	  You'll be unmuzzled, you certainly will.	  You'll be unmuzzled, you certainly will.
			
  I saw the face of the most smear'd and slobbering idiot they had at	  I saw the face of the most smear'd and slobbering idiot they had at	  I saw the face of the most smear'd and slobbering idiot they had at	  I saw the face of the most smear'd and slobbering idiot they had at
      the asylum,	      the asylum,	      the asylum,	      the asylum,
  And I knew for my consolation what they knew not,	  And I knew for my consolation what they knew not,	  And I knew for my consolation what they knew not,	  And I knew for my consolation what they knew not,
  I knew of the agents that emptied and broke my brother,	  I knew of the agents that emptied and broke my brother,	  I knew of the agents that emptied and broke my brother,	  I knew of the agents that emptied and broke my brother,
  The same wait to clear the rubbish from the fallen tenement,	  The same wait to clear the rubbish from the fallen tenement,	  The same wait to clear the rubbish from the fallen tenement,	  The same wait to clear the rubbish from the fallen tenement,
  And I shall look again in a score or two of ages,	  And I shall look again in a score or two of ages,	  And I shall look again in a score or two of ages,	  And I shall look again in a score or two of ages,
  And I shall meet the real landlord perfect and unharm'd, every inch	  And I shall meet the real landlord perfect and unharm'd, every inch	  And I shall meet the real landlord perfect and unharm'd, every inch	  And I shall meet the real landlord perfect and unharm'd, every inch
      as good as myself.	      as good as myself.	      as good as myself.	      as good as myself.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  The Lord advances, and yet advances,	  The Lord advances, and yet advances,	  The Lord advances, and yet advances,	  The Lord advances, and yet advances,
  Always the shadow in front, always the reach'd hand bringing up the	  Always the shadow in front, always the reach'd hand bringing up the	  Always the shadow in front, always the reach'd hand bringing up the	  Always the shadow in front, always the reach'd hand bringing up the
      laggards.	      laggards.	      laggards.	      laggards.
			
  Out of this face emerge banners and horses--O superb! I see what is coming,	  Out of this face emerge banners and horses--O superb! I see what is coming,	  Out of this face emerge banners and horses--O superb! I see what is coming,	  Out of this face emerge banners and horses--O superb! I see what is coming,
  I see the high pioneer-caps, see staves of runners clearing the way,	  I see the high pioneer-caps, see staves of runners clearing the way,	  I see the high pioneer-caps, see staves of runners clearing the way,	  I see the high pioneer-caps, see staves of runners clearing the way,
  I hear victorious drums.	  I hear victorious drums.	  I hear victorious drums.	  I hear victorious drums.
			
  This face is a life-boat,	  This face is a life-boat,	  This face is a life-boat,	  This face is a life-boat,
  This is the face commanding and bearded, it asks no odds of the rest,	  This is the face commanding and bearded, it asks no odds of the rest,	  This is the face commanding and bearded, it asks no odds of the rest,	  This is the face commanding and bearded, it asks no odds of the rest,
  This face is flavor'd fruit ready for eating,	  This face is flavor'd fruit ready for eating,	  This face is flavor'd fruit ready for eating,	  This face is flavor'd fruit ready for eating,
  This face of a healthy honest boy is the programme of all good.	  This face of a healthy honest boy is the programme of all good.	  This face of a healthy honest boy is the programme of all good.	  This face of a healthy honest boy is the programme of all good.
			
  These faces bear testimony slumbering or awake,	  These faces bear testimony slumbering or awake,	  These faces bear testimony slumbering or awake,	  These faces bear testimony slumbering or awake,
  They show their descent from the Master himself.	  They show their descent from the Master himself.	  They show their descent from the Master himself.	  They show their descent from the Master himself.
			
  Off the word I have spoken I except not one--red, white, black, are	  Off the word I have spoken I except not one--red, white, black, are	  Off the word I have spoken I except not one--red, white, black, are	  Off the word I have spoken I except not one--red, white, black, are
      all deific,	      all deific,	      all deific,	      all deific,
  In each house is the ovum, it comes forth after a thousand years.	  In each house is the ovum, it comes forth after a thousand years.	  In each house is the ovum, it comes forth after a thousand years.	  In each house is the ovum, it comes forth after a thousand years.
			
  Spots or cracks at the windows do not disturb me,	  Spots or cracks at the windows do not disturb me,	  Spots or cracks at the windows do not disturb me,	  Spots or cracks at the windows do not disturb me,
  Tall and sufficient stand behind and make signs to me,	  Tall and sufficient stand behind and make signs to me,	  Tall and sufficient stand behind and make signs to me,	  Tall and sufficient stand behind and make signs to me,
  I read the promise and patiently wait.	  I read the promise and patiently wait.	  I read the promise and patiently wait.	  I read the promise and patiently wait.
			
  This is a full-grown lily's face,	  This is a full-grown lily's face,	  This is a full-grown lily's face,	  This is a full-grown lily's face,
  She speaks to the limber-hipp'd man near the garden pickets,	  She speaks to the limber-hipp'd man near the garden pickets,	  She speaks to the limber-hipp'd man near the garden pickets,	  She speaks to the limber-hipp'd man near the garden pickets,
  Come here she blushingly cries, Come nigh to me limber-hipp'd man,	  Come here she blushingly cries, Come nigh to me limber-hipp'd man,	  Come here she blushingly cries, Come nigh to me limber-hipp'd man,	  Come here she blushingly cries, Come nigh to me limber-hipp'd man,
  Stand at my side till I lean as high as I can upon you,	  Stand at my side till I lean as high as I can upon you,	  Stand at my side till I lean as high as I can upon you,	  Stand at my side till I lean as high as I can upon you,
  Fill me with albescent honey, bend down to me,	  Fill me with albescent honey, bend down to me,	  Fill me with albescent honey, bend down to me,	  Fill me with albescent honey, bend down to me,
  Rub to me with your chafing beard, rub to my breast and shoulders.	  Rub to me with your chafing beard, rub to my breast and shoulders.	  Rub to me with your chafing beard, rub to my breast and shoulders.	  Rub to me with your chafing beard, rub to my breast and shoulders.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  The old face of the mother of many children,	  The old face of the mother of many children,	  The old face of the mother of many children,	  The old face of the mother of many children,
  Whist! I am fully content.	  Whist! I am fully content.	  Whist! I am fully content.	  Whist! I am fully content.
			
  Lull'd and late is the smoke of the First-day morning,	  Lull'd and late is the smoke of the First-day morning,	  Lull'd and late is the smoke of the First-day morning,	  Lull'd and late is the smoke of the First-day morning,
  It hangs low over the rows of trees by the fences,	  It hangs low over the rows of trees by the fences,	  It hangs low over the rows of trees by the fences,	  It hangs low over the rows of trees by the fences,
  It hangs thin by the sassafras and wild-cherry and cat-brier under them.	  It hangs thin by the sassafras and wild-cherry and cat-brier under them.	  It hangs thin by the sassafras and wild-cherry and cat-brier under them.	  It hangs thin by the sassafras and wild-cherry and cat-brier under them.
			
  I saw the rich ladies in full dress at the soiree,	  I saw the rich ladies in full dress at the soiree,	  I saw the rich ladies in full dress at the soiree,	  I saw the rich ladies in full dress at the soiree,
  I heard what the singers were singing so long,	  I heard what the singers were singing so long,	  I heard what the singers were singing so long,	  I heard what the singers were singing so long,
  Heard who sprang in crimson youth from the white froth and the water-blue.	  Heard who sprang in crimson youth from the white froth and the water-blue.	  Heard who sprang in crimson youth from the white froth and the water-blue.	  Heard who sprang in crimson youth from the white froth and the water-blue.
			
  Behold a woman!	  Behold a woman!	  Behold a woman!	  Behold a woman!
  She looks out from her quaker cap, her face is clearer and more	  She looks out from her quaker cap, her face is clearer and more	  She looks out from her quaker cap, her face is clearer and more	  She looks out from her quaker cap, her face is clearer and more
      beautiful than the sky.	      beautiful than the sky.	      beautiful than the sky.	      beautiful than the sky.
			
  She sits in an armchair under the shaded porch of the farmhouse,	  She sits in an armchair under the shaded porch of the farmhouse,	  She sits in an armchair under the shaded porch of the farmhouse,	  She sits in an armchair under the shaded porch of the farmhouse,
  The sun just shines on her old white head.	  The sun just shines on her old white head.	  The sun just shines on her old white head.	  The sun just shines on her old white head.
			
  Her ample gown is of cream-hued linen,	  Her ample gown is of cream-hued linen,	  Her ample gown is of cream-hued linen,	  Her ample gown is of cream-hued linen,
  Her grandsons raised the flax, and her grand-daughters spun it with	  Her grandsons raised the flax, and her grand-daughters spun it with	  Her grandsons raised the flax, and her grand-daughters spun it with	  Her grandsons raised the flax, and her grand-daughters spun it with
      the distaff and the wheel.	      the distaff and the wheel.	      the distaff and the wheel.	      the distaff and the wheel.
			
  The melodious character of the earth,	  The melodious character of the earth,	  The melodious character of the earth,	  The melodious character of the earth,
  The finish beyond which philosophy cannot go and does not wish to go,	  The finish beyond which philosophy cannot go and does not wish to go,	  The finish beyond which philosophy cannot go and does not wish to go,	  The finish beyond which philosophy cannot go and does not wish to go,
  The justified mother of men.	  The justified mother of men.	  The justified mother of men.	  The justified mother of men.
			
			
			
			
The Mystic Trumpeter	The Mystic Trumpeter	The Mystic Trumpeter	The Mystic Trumpeter
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Hark, some wild trumpeter, some strange musician,	  Hark, some wild trumpeter, some strange musician,	  Hark, some wild trumpeter, some strange musician,	  Hark, some wild trumpeter, some strange musician,
  Hovering unseen in air, vibrates capricious tunes to-night.	  Hovering unseen in air, vibrates capricious tunes to-night.	  Hovering unseen in air, vibrates capricious tunes to-night.	  Hovering unseen in air, vibrates capricious tunes to-night.
			
  I hear thee trumpeter, listening alert I catch thy notes,	  I hear thee trumpeter, listening alert I catch thy notes,	  I hear thee trumpeter, listening alert I catch thy notes,	  I hear thee trumpeter, listening alert I catch thy notes,
  Now pouring, whirling like a tempest round me,	  Now pouring, whirling like a tempest round me,	  Now pouring, whirling like a tempest round me,	  Now pouring, whirling like a tempest round me,
  Now low, subdued, now in the distance lost.	  Now low, subdued, now in the distance lost.	  Now low, subdued, now in the distance lost.	  Now low, subdued, now in the distance lost.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Come nearer bodiless one, haply in thee resounds	  Come nearer bodiless one, haply in thee resounds	  Come nearer bodiless one, haply in thee resounds	  Come nearer bodiless one, haply in thee resounds
  Some dead composer, haply thy pensive life	  Some dead composer, haply thy pensive life	  Some dead composer, haply thy pensive life	  Some dead composer, haply thy pensive life
  Was fill'd with aspirations high, unform'd ideals,	  Was fill'd with aspirations high, unform'd ideals,	  Was fill'd with aspirations high, unform'd ideals,	  Was fill'd with aspirations high, unform'd ideals,
  Waves, oceans musical, chaotically surging,	  Waves, oceans musical, chaotically surging,	  Waves, oceans musical, chaotically surging,	  Waves, oceans musical, chaotically surging,
  That now ecstatic ghost, close to me bending, thy cornet echoing, pealing,	  That now ecstatic ghost, close to me bending, thy cornet echoing, pealing,	  That now ecstatic ghost, close to me bending, thy cornet echoing, pealing,	  That now ecstatic ghost, close to me bending, thy cornet echoing, pealing,
  Gives out to no one's ears but mine, but freely gives to mine,	  Gives out to no one's ears but mine, but freely gives to mine,	  Gives out to no one's ears but mine, but freely gives to mine,	  Gives out to no one's ears but mine, but freely gives to mine,
  That I may thee translate.	  That I may thee translate.	  That I may thee translate.	  That I may thee translate.
			
       3	       3	       3	       3
  Blow trumpeter free and clear, I follow thee,	  Blow trumpeter free and clear, I follow thee,	  Blow trumpeter free and clear, I follow thee,	  Blow trumpeter free and clear, I follow thee,
  While at thy liquid prelude, glad, serene,	  While at thy liquid prelude, glad, serene,	  While at thy liquid prelude, glad, serene,	  While at thy liquid prelude, glad, serene,
  The fretting world, the streets, the noisy hours of day withdraw,	  The fretting world, the streets, the noisy hours of day withdraw,	  The fretting world, the streets, the noisy hours of day withdraw,	  The fretting world, the streets, the noisy hours of day withdraw,
  A holy calm descends like dew upon me,	  A holy calm descends like dew upon me,	  A holy calm descends like dew upon me,	  A holy calm descends like dew upon me,
  I walk in cool refreshing night the walks of Paradise,	  I walk in cool refreshing night the walks of Paradise,	  I walk in cool refreshing night the walks of Paradise,	  I walk in cool refreshing night the walks of Paradise,
  I scent the grass, the moist air and the roses;	  I scent the grass, the moist air and the roses;	  I scent the grass, the moist air and the roses;	  I scent the grass, the moist air and the roses;
  Thy song expands my numb'd imbonded spirit, thou freest, launchest me,	  Thy song expands my numb'd imbonded spirit, thou freest, launchest me,	  Thy song expands my numb'd imbonded spirit, thou freest, launchest me,	  Thy song expands my numb'd imbonded spirit, thou freest, launchest me,
  Floating and basking upon heaven's lake.	  Floating and basking upon heaven's lake.	  Floating and basking upon heaven's lake.	  Floating and basking upon heaven's lake.
			
       4	       4	       4	       4
  Blow again trumpeter! and for my sensuous eyes,	  Blow again trumpeter! and for my sensuous eyes,	  Blow again trumpeter! and for my sensuous eyes,	  Blow again trumpeter! and for my sensuous eyes,
  Bring the old pageants, show the feudal world.	  Bring the old pageants, show the feudal world.	  Bring the old pageants, show the feudal world.	  Bring the old pageants, show the feudal world.
			
  What charm thy music works! thou makest pass before me,	  What charm thy music works! thou makest pass before me,	  What charm thy music works! thou makest pass before me,	  What charm thy music works! thou makest pass before me,
  Ladies and cavaliers long dead, barons are in their castle halls,	  Ladies and cavaliers long dead, barons are in their castle halls,	  Ladies and cavaliers long dead, barons are in their castle halls,	  Ladies and cavaliers long dead, barons are in their castle halls,
      the troubadours are singing,	      the troubadours are singing,	      the troubadours are singing,	      the troubadours are singing,
  Arm'd knights go forth to redress wrongs, some in quest of the holy Graal;	  Arm'd knights go forth to redress wrongs, some in quest of the holy Graal;	  Arm'd knights go forth to redress wrongs, some in quest of the holy Graal;	  Arm'd knights go forth to redress wrongs, some in quest of the holy Graal;
  I see the tournament, I see the contestants incased in heavy armor	  I see the tournament, I see the contestants incased in heavy armor	  I see the tournament, I see the contestants incased in heavy armor	  I see the tournament, I see the contestants incased in heavy armor
      seated on stately champing horses,	      seated on stately champing horses,	      seated on stately champing horses,	      seated on stately champing horses,
  I hear the shouts, the sounds of blows and smiting steel;	  I hear the shouts, the sounds of blows and smiting steel;	  I hear the shouts, the sounds of blows and smiting steel;	  I hear the shouts, the sounds of blows and smiting steel;
  I see the Crusaders' tumultuous armies--hark, how the cymbals clang,	  I see the Crusaders' tumultuous armies--hark, how the cymbals clang,	  I see the Crusaders' tumultuous armies--hark, how the cymbals clang,	  I see the Crusaders' tumultuous armies--hark, how the cymbals clang,
  Lo, where the monks walk in advance, bearing the cross on high.	  Lo, where the monks walk in advance, bearing the cross on high.	  Lo, where the monks walk in advance, bearing the cross on high.	  Lo, where the monks walk in advance, bearing the cross on high.
			
       5	       5	       5	       5
  Blow again trumpeter! and for thy theme,	  Blow again trumpeter! and for thy theme,	  Blow again trumpeter! and for thy theme,	  Blow again trumpeter! and for thy theme,
  Take now the enclosing theme of all, the solvent and the setting,	  Take now the enclosing theme of all, the solvent and the setting,	  Take now the enclosing theme of all, the solvent and the setting,	  Take now the enclosing theme of all, the solvent and the setting,
  Love, that is pulse of all, the sustenance and the pang,	  Love, that is pulse of all, the sustenance and the pang,	  Love, that is pulse of all, the sustenance and the pang,	  Love, that is pulse of all, the sustenance and the pang,
  The heart of man and woman all for love,	  The heart of man and woman all for love,	  The heart of man and woman all for love,	  The heart of man and woman all for love,
  No other theme but love--knitting, enclosing, all-diffusing love.	  No other theme but love--knitting, enclosing, all-diffusing love.	  No other theme but love--knitting, enclosing, all-diffusing love.	  No other theme but love--knitting, enclosing, all-diffusing love.
			
  O how the immortal phantoms crowd around me!	  O how the immortal phantoms crowd around me!	  O how the immortal phantoms crowd around me!	  O how the immortal phantoms crowd around me!
  I see the vast alembic ever working, I see and know the flames that	  I see the vast alembic ever working, I see and know the flames that	  I see the vast alembic ever working, I see and know the flames that	  I see the vast alembic ever working, I see and know the flames that
      heat the world,	      heat the world,	      heat the world,	      heat the world,
  The glow, the blush, the beating hearts of lovers,	  The glow, the blush, the beating hearts of lovers,	  The glow, the blush, the beating hearts of lovers,	  The glow, the blush, the beating hearts of lovers,
  So blissful happy some, and some so silent, dark, and nigh to death;	  So blissful happy some, and some so silent, dark, and nigh to death;	  So blissful happy some, and some so silent, dark, and nigh to death;	  So blissful happy some, and some so silent, dark, and nigh to death;
  Love, that is all the earth to lovers--love, that mocks time and space,	  Love, that is all the earth to lovers--love, that mocks time and space,	  Love, that is all the earth to lovers--love, that mocks time and space,	  Love, that is all the earth to lovers--love, that mocks time and space,
  Love, that is day and night--love, that is sun and moon and stars,	  Love, that is day and night--love, that is sun and moon and stars,	  Love, that is day and night--love, that is sun and moon and stars,	  Love, that is day and night--love, that is sun and moon and stars,
  Love, that is crimson, sumptuous, sick with perfume,	  Love, that is crimson, sumptuous, sick with perfume,	  Love, that is crimson, sumptuous, sick with perfume,	  Love, that is crimson, sumptuous, sick with perfume,
  No other words but words of love, no other thought but love.	  No other words but words of love, no other thought but love.	  No other words but words of love, no other thought but love.	  No other words but words of love, no other thought but love.
			
       6	       6	       6	       6
  Blow again trumpeter--conjure war's alarums.	  Blow again trumpeter--conjure war's alarums.	  Blow again trumpeter--conjure war's alarums.	  Blow again trumpeter--conjure war's alarums.
			
  Swift to thy spell a shuddering hum like distant thunder rolls,	  Swift to thy spell a shuddering hum like distant thunder rolls,	  Swift to thy spell a shuddering hum like distant thunder rolls,	  Swift to thy spell a shuddering hum like distant thunder rolls,
  Lo, where the arm'd men hasten--lo, mid the clouds of dust the glint	  Lo, where the arm'd men hasten--lo, mid the clouds of dust the glint	  Lo, where the arm'd men hasten--lo, mid the clouds of dust the glint	  Lo, where the arm'd men hasten--lo, mid the clouds of dust the glint
      of bayonets,	      of bayonets,	      of bayonets,	      of bayonets,
  I see the grime-faced cannoneers, I mark the rosy flash amid the	  I see the grime-faced cannoneers, I mark the rosy flash amid the	  I see the grime-faced cannoneers, I mark the rosy flash amid the	  I see the grime-faced cannoneers, I mark the rosy flash amid the
      smoke, I hear the cracking of the guns;	      smoke, I hear the cracking of the guns;	      smoke, I hear the cracking of the guns;	      smoke, I hear the cracking of the guns;
  Nor war alone--thy fearful music-song, wild player, brings every	  Nor war alone--thy fearful music-song, wild player, brings every	  Nor war alone--thy fearful music-song, wild player, brings every	  Nor war alone--thy fearful music-song, wild player, brings every
      sight of fear,	      sight of fear,	      sight of fear,	      sight of fear,
  The deeds of ruthless brigands, rapine, murder--I hear the cries for help!	  The deeds of ruthless brigands, rapine, murder--I hear the cries for help!	  The deeds of ruthless brigands, rapine, murder--I hear the cries for help!	  The deeds of ruthless brigands, rapine, murder--I hear the cries for help!
  I see ships foundering at sea, I behold on deck and below deck the	  I see ships foundering at sea, I behold on deck and below deck the	  I see ships foundering at sea, I behold on deck and below deck the	  I see ships foundering at sea, I behold on deck and below deck the
      terrible tableaus.	      terrible tableaus.	      terrible tableaus.	      terrible tableaus.
			
       7	       7	       7	       7
  O trumpeter, methinks I am myself the instrument thou playest,	  O trumpeter, methinks I am myself the instrument thou playest,	  O trumpeter, methinks I am myself the instrument thou playest,	  O trumpeter, methinks I am myself the instrument thou playest,
  Thou melt'st my heart, my brain--thou movest, drawest, changest	  Thou melt'st my heart, my brain--thou movest, drawest, changest	  Thou melt'st my heart, my brain--thou movest, drawest, changest	  Thou melt'st my heart, my brain--thou movest, drawest, changest
      them at will;	      them at will;	      them at will;	      them at will;
  And now thy sullen notes send darkness through me,	  And now thy sullen notes send darkness through me,	  And now thy sullen notes send darkness through me,	  And now thy sullen notes send darkness through me,
  Thou takest away all cheering light, all hope,	  Thou takest away all cheering light, all hope,	  Thou takest away all cheering light, all hope,	  Thou takest away all cheering light, all hope,
  I see the enslaved, the overthrown, the hurt, the opprest of the	  I see the enslaved, the overthrown, the hurt, the opprest of the	  I see the enslaved, the overthrown, the hurt, the opprest of the	  I see the enslaved, the overthrown, the hurt, the opprest of the
      whole earth,	      whole earth,	      whole earth,	      whole earth,
  I feel the measureless shame and humiliation of my race, it becomes	  I feel the measureless shame and humiliation of my race, it becomes	  I feel the measureless shame and humiliation of my race, it becomes	  I feel the measureless shame and humiliation of my race, it becomes
      all mine,	      all mine,	      all mine,	      all mine,
  Mine too the revenges of humanity, the wrongs of ages, baffled feuds	  Mine too the revenges of humanity, the wrongs of ages, baffled feuds	  Mine too the revenges of humanity, the wrongs of ages, baffled feuds	  Mine too the revenges of humanity, the wrongs of ages, baffled feuds
      and hatreds,	      and hatreds,	      and hatreds,	      and hatreds,
  Utter defeat upon me weighs--all lost--the foe victorious,	  Utter defeat upon me weighs--all lost--the foe victorious,	  Utter defeat upon me weighs--all lost--the foe victorious,	  Utter defeat upon me weighs--all lost--the foe victorious,
  (Yet 'mid the ruins Pride colossal stands unshaken to the last,	  (Yet 'mid the ruins Pride colossal stands unshaken to the last,	  (Yet 'mid the ruins Pride colossal stands unshaken to the last,	  (Yet 'mid the ruins Pride colossal stands unshaken to the last,
  Endurance, resolution to the last.)	  Endurance, resolution to the last.)	  Endurance, resolution to the last.)	  Endurance, resolution to the last.)
			
			
      8	      8	      8	      8
  Now trumpeter for thy close,	  Now trumpeter for thy close,	  Now trumpeter for thy close,	  Now trumpeter for thy close,
  Vouchsafe a higher strain than any yet,	  Vouchsafe a higher strain than any yet,	  Vouchsafe a higher strain than any yet,	  Vouchsafe a higher strain than any yet,
  Sing to my soul, renew its languishing faith and hope,	  Sing to my soul, renew its languishing faith and hope,	  Sing to my soul, renew its languishing faith and hope,	  Sing to my soul, renew its languishing faith and hope,
  Rouse up my slow belief, give me some vision of the future,	  Rouse up my slow belief, give me some vision of the future,	  Rouse up my slow belief, give me some vision of the future,	  Rouse up my slow belief, give me some vision of the future,
  Give me for once its prophecy and joy.	  Give me for once its prophecy and joy.	  Give me for once its prophecy and joy.	  Give me for once its prophecy and joy.
			
  O glad, exulting, culminating song!	  O glad, exulting, culminating song!	  O glad, exulting, culminating song!	  O glad, exulting, culminating song!
  A vigor more than earth's is in thy notes,	  A vigor more than earth's is in thy notes,	  A vigor more than earth's is in thy notes,	  A vigor more than earth's is in thy notes,
  Marches of victory--man disenthral'd--the conqueror at last,	  Marches of victory--man disenthral'd--the conqueror at last,	  Marches of victory--man disenthral'd--the conqueror at last,	  Marches of victory--man disenthral'd--the conqueror at last,
  Hymns to the universal God from universal man--all joy!	  Hymns to the universal God from universal man--all joy!	  Hymns to the universal God from universal man--all joy!	  Hymns to the universal God from universal man--all joy!
  A reborn race appears--a perfect world, all joy!	  A reborn race appears--a perfect world, all joy!	  A reborn race appears--a perfect world, all joy!	  A reborn race appears--a perfect world, all joy!
  Women and men in wisdom innocence and health--all joy!	  Women and men in wisdom innocence and health--all joy!	  Women and men in wisdom innocence and health--all joy!	  Women and men in wisdom innocence and health--all joy!
  Riotous laughing bacchanals fill'd with joy!	  Riotous laughing bacchanals fill'd with joy!	  Riotous laughing bacchanals fill'd with joy!	  Riotous laughing bacchanals fill'd with joy!
  War, sorrow, suffering gone--the rank earth purged--nothing but joy left!	  War, sorrow, suffering gone--the rank earth purged--nothing but joy left!	  War, sorrow, suffering gone--the rank earth purged--nothing but joy left!	  War, sorrow, suffering gone--the rank earth purged--nothing but joy left!
  The ocean fill'd with joy--the atmosphere all joy!	  The ocean fill'd with joy--the atmosphere all joy!	  The ocean fill'd with joy--the atmosphere all joy!	  The ocean fill'd with joy--the atmosphere all joy!
  Joy! joy! in freedom, worship, love! joy in the ecstasy of life!	  Joy! joy! in freedom, worship, love! joy in the ecstasy of life!	  Joy! joy! in freedom, worship, love! joy in the ecstasy of life!	  Joy! joy! in freedom, worship, love! joy in the ecstasy of life!
  Enough to merely be! enough to breathe!	  Enough to merely be! enough to breathe!	  Enough to merely be! enough to breathe!	  Enough to merely be! enough to breathe!
  Joy! joy! all over joy!	  Joy! joy! all over joy!	  Joy! joy! all over joy!	  Joy! joy! all over joy!
			
			
			
			
To a Locomotive in Winter	To a Locomotive in Winter	To a Locomotive in Winter	To a Locomotive in Winter
			
  Thee for my recitative,	  Thee for my recitative,	  Thee for my recitative,	  Thee for my recitative,
  Thee in the driving storm even as now, the snow, the winter-day declining,	  Thee in the driving storm even as now, the snow, the winter-day declining,	  Thee in the driving storm even as now, the snow, the winter-day declining,	  Thee in the driving storm even as now, the snow, the winter-day declining,
  Thee in thy panoply, thy measur'd dual throbbing and thy beat convulsive,	  Thee in thy panoply, thy measur'd dual throbbing and thy beat convulsive,	  Thee in thy panoply, thy measur'd dual throbbing and thy beat convulsive,	  Thee in thy panoply, thy measur'd dual throbbing and thy beat convulsive,
  Thy black cylindric body, golden brass and silvery steel,	  Thy black cylindric body, golden brass and silvery steel,	  Thy black cylindric body, golden brass and silvery steel,	  Thy black cylindric body, golden brass and silvery steel,
  Thy ponderous side-bars, parallel and connecting rods, gyrating,	  Thy ponderous side-bars, parallel and connecting rods, gyrating,	  Thy ponderous side-bars, parallel and connecting rods, gyrating,	  Thy ponderous side-bars, parallel and connecting rods, gyrating,
      shuttling at thy sides,	      shuttling at thy sides,	      shuttling at thy sides,	      shuttling at thy sides,
  Thy metrical, now swelling pant and roar, now tapering in the distance,	  Thy metrical, now swelling pant and roar, now tapering in the distance,	  Thy metrical, now swelling pant and roar, now tapering in the distance,	  Thy metrical, now swelling pant and roar, now tapering in the distance,
  Thy great protruding head-light fix'd in front,	  Thy great protruding head-light fix'd in front,	  Thy great protruding head-light fix'd in front,	  Thy great protruding head-light fix'd in front,
  Thy long, pale, floating vapor-pennants, tinged with delicate purple,	  Thy long, pale, floating vapor-pennants, tinged with delicate purple,	  Thy long, pale, floating vapor-pennants, tinged with delicate purple,	  Thy long, pale, floating vapor-pennants, tinged with delicate purple,
  The dense and murky clouds out-belching from thy smoke-stack,	  The dense and murky clouds out-belching from thy smoke-stack,	  The dense and murky clouds out-belching from thy smoke-stack,	  The dense and murky clouds out-belching from thy smoke-stack,
  Thy knitted frame, thy springs and valves, the tremulous twinkle of	  Thy knitted frame, thy springs and valves, the tremulous twinkle of	  Thy knitted frame, thy springs and valves, the tremulous twinkle of	  Thy knitted frame, thy springs and valves, the tremulous twinkle of
      thy wheels,	      thy wheels,	      thy wheels,	      thy wheels,
  Thy train of cars behind, obedient, merrily following,	  Thy train of cars behind, obedient, merrily following,	  Thy train of cars behind, obedient, merrily following,	  Thy train of cars behind, obedient, merrily following,
  Through gale or calm, now swift, now slack, yet steadily careering;	  Through gale or calm, now swift, now slack, yet steadily careering;	  Through gale or calm, now swift, now slack, yet steadily careering;	  Through gale or calm, now swift, now slack, yet steadily careering;
  Type of the modern--emblem of motion and power--pulse of the continent,	  Type of the modern--emblem of motion and power--pulse of the continent,	  Type of the modern--emblem of motion and power--pulse of the continent,	  Type of the modern--emblem of motion and power--pulse of the continent,
  For once come serve the Muse and merge in verse, even as here I see thee,	  For once come serve the Muse and merge in verse, even as here I see thee,	  For once come serve the Muse and merge in verse, even as here I see thee,	  For once come serve the Muse and merge in verse, even as here I see thee,
  With storm and buffeting gusts of wind and falling snow,	  With storm and buffeting gusts of wind and falling snow,	  With storm and buffeting gusts of wind and falling snow,	  With storm and buffeting gusts of wind and falling snow,
  By day thy warning ringing bell to sound its notes,	  By day thy warning ringing bell to sound its notes,	  By day thy warning ringing bell to sound its notes,	  By day thy warning ringing bell to sound its notes,
  By night thy silent signal lamps to swing.	  By night thy silent signal lamps to swing.	  By night thy silent signal lamps to swing.	  By night thy silent signal lamps to swing.
			
  Fierce-throated beauty!	  Fierce-throated beauty!	  Fierce-throated beauty!	  Fierce-throated beauty!
  Roll through my chant with all thy lawless music, thy swinging lamps	  Roll through my chant with all thy lawless music, thy swinging lamps	  Roll through my chant with all thy lawless music, thy swinging lamps	  Roll through my chant with all thy lawless music, thy swinging lamps
      at night,	      at night,	      at night,	      at night,
  Thy madly-whistled laughter, echoing, rumbling like an earthquake,	  Thy madly-whistled laughter, echoing, rumbling like an earthquake,	  Thy madly-whistled laughter, echoing, rumbling like an earthquake,	  Thy madly-whistled laughter, echoing, rumbling like an earthquake,
      rousing all,	      rousing all,	      rousing all,	      rousing all,
  Law of thyself complete, thine own track firmly holding,	  Law of thyself complete, thine own track firmly holding,	  Law of thyself complete, thine own track firmly holding,	  Law of thyself complete, thine own track firmly holding,
  (No sweetness debonair of tearful harp or glib piano thine,)	  (No sweetness debonair of tearful harp or glib piano thine,)	  (No sweetness debonair of tearful harp or glib piano thine,)	  (No sweetness debonair of tearful harp or glib piano thine,)
  Thy trills of shrieks by rocks and hills return'd,	  Thy trills of shrieks by rocks and hills return'd,	  Thy trills of shrieks by rocks and hills return'd,	  Thy trills of shrieks by rocks and hills return'd,
  Launch'd o'er the prairies wide, across the lakes,	  Launch'd o'er the prairies wide, across the lakes,	  Launch'd o'er the prairies wide, across the lakes,	  Launch'd o'er the prairies wide, across the lakes,
  To the free skies unpent and glad and strong.	  To the free skies unpent and glad and strong.	  To the free skies unpent and glad and strong.	  To the free skies unpent and glad and strong.
			
			
			
			
O Magnet-South	O Magnet-South	O Magnet-South	O Magnet-South
			
  O magnet-south! O glistening perfumed South! my South!	  O magnet-south! O glistening perfumed South! my South!	  O magnet-south! O glistening perfumed South! my South!	  O magnet-south! O glistening perfumed South! my South!
  O quick mettle, rich blood, impulse and love! good and evil! O all	  O quick mettle, rich blood, impulse and love! good and evil! O all	  O quick mettle, rich blood, impulse and love! good and evil! O all	  O quick mettle, rich blood, impulse and love! good and evil! O all
      dear to me!	      dear to me!	      dear to me!	      dear to me!
  O dear to me my birth-things--all moving things and the trees where	  O dear to me my birth-things--all moving things and the trees where	  O dear to me my birth-things--all moving things and the trees where	  O dear to me my birth-things--all moving things and the trees where
      I was born--the grains, plants, rivers,	      I was born--the grains, plants, rivers,	      I was born--the grains, plants, rivers,	      I was born--the grains, plants, rivers,
  Dear to me my own slow sluggish rivers where they flow, distant,	  Dear to me my own slow sluggish rivers where they flow, distant,	  Dear to me my own slow sluggish rivers where they flow, distant,	  Dear to me my own slow sluggish rivers where they flow, distant,
      over flats of slivery sands or through swamps,	      over flats of slivery sands or through swamps,	      over flats of slivery sands or through swamps,	      over flats of slivery sands or through swamps,
  Dear to me the Roanoke, the Savannah, the Altamahaw, the Pedee, the	  Dear to me the Roanoke, the Savannah, the Altamahaw, the Pedee, the	  Dear to me the Roanoke, the Savannah, the Altamahaw, the Pedee, the	  Dear to me the Roanoke, the Savannah, the Altamahaw, the Pedee, the
      Tombigbee, the Santee, the Coosa and the Sabine,	      Tombigbee, the Santee, the Coosa and the Sabine,	      Tombigbee, the Santee, the Coosa and the Sabine,	      Tombigbee, the Santee, the Coosa and the Sabine,
  O pensive, far away wandering, I return with my soul to haunt their	  O pensive, far away wandering, I return with my soul to haunt their	  O pensive, far away wandering, I return with my soul to haunt their	  O pensive, far away wandering, I return with my soul to haunt their
      banks again,	      banks again,	      banks again,	      banks again,
  Again in Florida I float on transparent lakes, I float on the	  Again in Florida I float on transparent lakes, I float on the	  Again in Florida I float on transparent lakes, I float on the	  Again in Florida I float on transparent lakes, I float on the
      Okeechobee, I cross the hummock-land or through pleasant openings	      Okeechobee, I cross the hummock-land or through pleasant openings	      Okeechobee, I cross the hummock-land or through pleasant openings	      Okeechobee, I cross the hummock-land or through pleasant openings
      or dense forests,	      or dense forests,	      or dense forests,	      or dense forests,
  I see the parrots in the woods, I see the papaw-tree and the	  I see the parrots in the woods, I see the papaw-tree and the	  I see the parrots in the woods, I see the papaw-tree and the	  I see the parrots in the woods, I see the papaw-tree and the
      blossoming titi;	      blossoming titi;	      blossoming titi;	      blossoming titi;
  Again, sailing in my coaster on deck, I coast off Georgia, I coast	  Again, sailing in my coaster on deck, I coast off Georgia, I coast	  Again, sailing in my coaster on deck, I coast off Georgia, I coast	  Again, sailing in my coaster on deck, I coast off Georgia, I coast
      up the Carolinas,	      up the Carolinas,	      up the Carolinas,	      up the Carolinas,
  I see where the live-oak is growing, I see where the yellow-pine,	  I see where the live-oak is growing, I see where the yellow-pine,	  I see where the live-oak is growing, I see where the yellow-pine,	  I see where the live-oak is growing, I see where the yellow-pine,
      the scented bay-tree, the lemon and orange, the cypress, the	      the scented bay-tree, the lemon and orange, the cypress, the	      the scented bay-tree, the lemon and orange, the cypress, the	      the scented bay-tree, the lemon and orange, the cypress, the
      graceful palmetto,	      graceful palmetto,	      graceful palmetto,	      graceful palmetto,
  I pass rude sea-headlands and enter Pamlico sound through an inlet,	  I pass rude sea-headlands and enter Pamlico sound through an inlet,	  I pass rude sea-headlands and enter Pamlico sound through an inlet,	  I pass rude sea-headlands and enter Pamlico sound through an inlet,
      and dart my vision inland;	      and dart my vision inland;	      and dart my vision inland;	      and dart my vision inland;
  O the cotton plant! the growing fields of rice, sugar, hemp!	  O the cotton plant! the growing fields of rice, sugar, hemp!	  O the cotton plant! the growing fields of rice, sugar, hemp!	  O the cotton plant! the growing fields of rice, sugar, hemp!
  The cactus guarded with thorns, the laurel-tree with large white flowers,	  The cactus guarded with thorns, the laurel-tree with large white flowers,	  The cactus guarded with thorns, the laurel-tree with large white flowers,	  The cactus guarded with thorns, the laurel-tree with large white flowers,
  The range afar, the richness and barrenness, the old woods charged	  The range afar, the richness and barrenness, the old woods charged	  The range afar, the richness and barrenness, the old woods charged	  The range afar, the richness and barrenness, the old woods charged
      with mistletoe and trailing moss,	      with mistletoe and trailing moss,	      with mistletoe and trailing moss,	      with mistletoe and trailing moss,
  The piney odor and the gloom, the awful natural stillness, (here in	  The piney odor and the gloom, the awful natural stillness, (here in	  The piney odor and the gloom, the awful natural stillness, (here in	  The piney odor and the gloom, the awful natural stillness, (here in
      these dense swamps the freebooter carries his gun, and the	      these dense swamps the freebooter carries his gun, and the	      these dense swamps the freebooter carries his gun, and the	      these dense swamps the freebooter carries his gun, and the
      fugitive has his conceal'd hut;)	      fugitive has his conceal'd hut;)	      fugitive has his conceal'd hut;)	      fugitive has his conceal'd hut;)
  O the strange fascination of these half-known half-impassable	  O the strange fascination of these half-known half-impassable	  O the strange fascination of these half-known half-impassable	  O the strange fascination of these half-known half-impassable
      swamps, infested by reptiles, resounding with the bellow of the	      swamps, infested by reptiles, resounding with the bellow of the	      swamps, infested by reptiles, resounding with the bellow of the	      swamps, infested by reptiles, resounding with the bellow of the
      alligator, the sad noises of the night-owl and the wild-cat, and	      alligator, the sad noises of the night-owl and the wild-cat, and	      alligator, the sad noises of the night-owl and the wild-cat, and	      alligator, the sad noises of the night-owl and the wild-cat, and
      the whirr of the rattlesnake,	      the whirr of the rattlesnake,	      the whirr of the rattlesnake,	      the whirr of the rattlesnake,
  The mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing all the forenoon,	  The mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing all the forenoon,	  The mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing all the forenoon,	  The mocking-bird, the American mimic, singing all the forenoon,
      singing through the moon-lit night,	      singing through the moon-lit night,	      singing through the moon-lit night,	      singing through the moon-lit night,
  The humming-bird, the wild turkey, the raccoon, the opossum;	  The humming-bird, the wild turkey, the raccoon, the opossum;	  The humming-bird, the wild turkey, the raccoon, the opossum;	  The humming-bird, the wild turkey, the raccoon, the opossum;
  A Kentucky corn-field, the tall, graceful, long-leav'd corn,	  A Kentucky corn-field, the tall, graceful, long-leav'd corn,	  A Kentucky corn-field, the tall, graceful, long-leav'd corn,	  A Kentucky corn-field, the tall, graceful, long-leav'd corn,
      slender, flapping, bright green, with tassels, with beautiful	      slender, flapping, bright green, with tassels, with beautiful	      slender, flapping, bright green, with tassels, with beautiful	      slender, flapping, bright green, with tassels, with beautiful
      ears each well-sheath'd in its husk;	      ears each well-sheath'd in its husk;	      ears each well-sheath'd in its husk;	      ears each well-sheath'd in its husk;
  O my heart! O tender and fierce pangs, I can stand them not, I will depart;	  O my heart! O tender and fierce pangs, I can stand them not, I will depart;	  O my heart! O tender and fierce pangs, I can stand them not, I will depart;	  O my heart! O tender and fierce pangs, I can stand them not, I will depart;
  O to be a Virginian where I grew up! O to be a Carolinian!	  O to be a Virginian where I grew up! O to be a Carolinian!	  O to be a Virginian where I grew up! O to be a Carolinian!	  O to be a Virginian where I grew up! O to be a Carolinian!
  O longings irrepressible! O I will go back to old Tennessee and	  O longings irrepressible! O I will go back to old Tennessee and	  O longings irrepressible! O I will go back to old Tennessee and	  O longings irrepressible! O I will go back to old Tennessee and
      never wander more.	      never wander more.	      never wander more.	      never wander more.
			
			
			
			
Mannahatta	Mannahatta	Mannahatta	Mannahatta
			
  I was asking for something specific and perfect for my city,	  I was asking for something specific and perfect for my city,	  I was asking for something specific and perfect for my city,	  I was asking for something specific and perfect for my city,
  Whereupon lo! upsprang the aboriginal name.	  Whereupon lo! upsprang the aboriginal name.	  Whereupon lo! upsprang the aboriginal name.	  Whereupon lo! upsprang the aboriginal name.
			
  Now I see what there is in a name, a word, liquid, sane, unruly,	  Now I see what there is in a name, a word, liquid, sane, unruly,	  Now I see what there is in a name, a word, liquid, sane, unruly,	  Now I see what there is in a name, a word, liquid, sane, unruly,
      musical, self-sufficient,	      musical, self-sufficient,	      musical, self-sufficient,	      musical, self-sufficient,
  I see that the word of my city is that word from of old,	  I see that the word of my city is that word from of old,	  I see that the word of my city is that word from of old,	  I see that the word of my city is that word from of old,
  Because I see that word nested in nests of water-bays, superb,	  Because I see that word nested in nests of water-bays, superb,	  Because I see that word nested in nests of water-bays, superb,	  Because I see that word nested in nests of water-bays, superb,
  Rich, hemm'd thick all around with sailships and steamships, an	  Rich, hemm'd thick all around with sailships and steamships, an	  Rich, hemm'd thick all around with sailships and steamships, an	  Rich, hemm'd thick all around with sailships and steamships, an
      island sixteen miles long, solid-founded,	      island sixteen miles long, solid-founded,	      island sixteen miles long, solid-founded,	      island sixteen miles long, solid-founded,
  Numberless crowded streets, high growths of iron, slender, strong,	  Numberless crowded streets, high growths of iron, slender, strong,	  Numberless crowded streets, high growths of iron, slender, strong,	  Numberless crowded streets, high growths of iron, slender, strong,
      light, splendidly uprising toward clear skies,	      light, splendidly uprising toward clear skies,	      light, splendidly uprising toward clear skies,	      light, splendidly uprising toward clear skies,
  Tides swift and ample, well-loved by me, toward sundown,	  Tides swift and ample, well-loved by me, toward sundown,	  Tides swift and ample, well-loved by me, toward sundown,	  Tides swift and ample, well-loved by me, toward sundown,
  The flowing sea-currents, the little islands, larger adjoining	  The flowing sea-currents, the little islands, larger adjoining	  The flowing sea-currents, the little islands, larger adjoining	  The flowing sea-currents, the little islands, larger adjoining
      islands, the heights, the villas,	      islands, the heights, the villas,	      islands, the heights, the villas,	      islands, the heights, the villas,
  The countless masts, the white shore-steamers, the lighters, the	  The countless masts, the white shore-steamers, the lighters, the	  The countless masts, the white shore-steamers, the lighters, the	  The countless masts, the white shore-steamers, the lighters, the
      ferry-boats, the black sea-steamers well-model'd,	      ferry-boats, the black sea-steamers well-model'd,	      ferry-boats, the black sea-steamers well-model'd,	      ferry-boats, the black sea-steamers well-model'd,
  The down-town streets, the jobbers' houses of business, the houses	  The down-town streets, the jobbers' houses of business, the houses	  The down-town streets, the jobbers' houses of business, the houses	  The down-town streets, the jobbers' houses of business, the houses
      of business of the ship-merchants and money-brokers, the river-streets,	      of business of the ship-merchants and money-brokers, the river-streets,	      of business of the ship-merchants and money-brokers, the river-streets,	      of business of the ship-merchants and money-brokers, the river-streets,
  Immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand in a week,	  Immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand in a week,	  Immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand in a week,	  Immigrants arriving, fifteen or twenty thousand in a week,
  The carts hauling goods, the manly race of drivers of horses, the	  The carts hauling goods, the manly race of drivers of horses, the	  The carts hauling goods, the manly race of drivers of horses, the	  The carts hauling goods, the manly race of drivers of horses, the
      brown-faced sailors,	      brown-faced sailors,	      brown-faced sailors,	      brown-faced sailors,
  The summer air, the bright sun shining, and the sailing clouds aloft,	  The summer air, the bright sun shining, and the sailing clouds aloft,	  The summer air, the bright sun shining, and the sailing clouds aloft,	  The summer air, the bright sun shining, and the sailing clouds aloft,
  The winter snows, the sleigh-bells, the broken ice in the river,	  The winter snows, the sleigh-bells, the broken ice in the river,	  The winter snows, the sleigh-bells, the broken ice in the river,	  The winter snows, the sleigh-bells, the broken ice in the river,
      passing along up or down with the flood-tide or ebb-tide,	      passing along up or down with the flood-tide or ebb-tide,	      passing along up or down with the flood-tide or ebb-tide,	      passing along up or down with the flood-tide or ebb-tide,
  The mechanics of the city, the masters, well-form'd,	  The mechanics of the city, the masters, well-form'd,	  The mechanics of the city, the masters, well-form'd,	  The mechanics of the city, the masters, well-form'd,
      beautiful-faced, looking you straight in the eyes,	      beautiful-faced, looking you straight in the eyes,	      beautiful-faced, looking you straight in the eyes,	      beautiful-faced, looking you straight in the eyes,
  Trottoirs throng'd, vehicles, Broadway, the women, the shops and shows,	  Trottoirs throng'd, vehicles, Broadway, the women, the shops and shows,	  Trottoirs throng'd, vehicles, Broadway, the women, the shops and shows,	  Trottoirs throng'd, vehicles, Broadway, the women, the shops and shows,
  A million people--manners free and superb--open voices--hospitality--	  A million people--manners free and superb--open voices--hospitality--	  A million people--manners free and superb--open voices--hospitality--	  A million people--manners free and superb--open voices--hospitality--
      the most courageous and friendly young men,	      the most courageous and friendly young men,	      the most courageous and friendly young men,	      the most courageous and friendly young men,
  City of hurried and sparkling waters! city of spires and masts!	  City of hurried and sparkling waters! city of spires and masts!	  City of hurried and sparkling waters! city of spires and masts!	  City of hurried and sparkling waters! city of spires and masts!
  City nested in bays! my city!	  City nested in bays! my city!	  City nested in bays! my city!	  City nested in bays! my city!
			
			
			
			
All Is Truth	All Is Truth	All Is Truth	All Is Truth
			
  O me, man of slack faith so long,	  O me, man of slack faith so long,	  O me, man of slack faith so long,	  O me, man of slack faith so long,
  Standing aloof, denying portions so long,	  Standing aloof, denying portions so long,	  Standing aloof, denying portions so long,	  Standing aloof, denying portions so long,
  Only aware to-day of compact all-diffused truth,	  Only aware to-day of compact all-diffused truth,	  Only aware to-day of compact all-diffused truth,	  Only aware to-day of compact all-diffused truth,
  Discovering to-day there is no lie or form of lie, and can be none,	  Discovering to-day there is no lie or form of lie, and can be none,	  Discovering to-day there is no lie or form of lie, and can be none,	  Discovering to-day there is no lie or form of lie, and can be none,
      but grows as inevitably upon itself as the truth does upon itself,	      but grows as inevitably upon itself as the truth does upon itself,	      but grows as inevitably upon itself as the truth does upon itself,	      but grows as inevitably upon itself as the truth does upon itself,
  Or as any law of the earth or any natural production of the earth does.	  Or as any law of the earth or any natural production of the earth does.	  Or as any law of the earth or any natural production of the earth does.	  Or as any law of the earth or any natural production of the earth does.
			
  (This is curious and may not be realized immediately, but it must be	  (This is curious and may not be realized immediately, but it must be	  (This is curious and may not be realized immediately, but it must be	  (This is curious and may not be realized immediately, but it must be
      realized,	      realized,	      realized,	      realized,
  I feel in myself that I represent falsehoods equally with the rest,	  I feel in myself that I represent falsehoods equally with the rest,	  I feel in myself that I represent falsehoods equally with the rest,	  I feel in myself that I represent falsehoods equally with the rest,
  And that the universe does.)	  And that the universe does.)	  And that the universe does.)	  And that the universe does.)
			
  Where has fail'd a perfect return indifferent of lies or the truth?	  Where has fail'd a perfect return indifferent of lies or the truth?	  Where has fail'd a perfect return indifferent of lies or the truth?	  Where has fail'd a perfect return indifferent of lies or the truth?
  Is it upon the ground, or in water or fire? or in the spirit of man?	  Is it upon the ground, or in water or fire? or in the spirit of man?	  Is it upon the ground, or in water or fire? or in the spirit of man?	  Is it upon the ground, or in water or fire? or in the spirit of man?
      or in the meat and blood?	      or in the meat and blood?	      or in the meat and blood?	      or in the meat and blood?
			
  Meditating among liars and retreating sternly into myself, I see	  Meditating among liars and retreating sternly into myself, I see	  Meditating among liars and retreating sternly into myself, I see	  Meditating among liars and retreating sternly into myself, I see
      that there are really no liars or lies after all,	      that there are really no liars or lies after all,	      that there are really no liars or lies after all,	      that there are really no liars or lies after all,
  And that nothing fails its perfect return, and that what are called	  And that nothing fails its perfect return, and that what are called	  And that nothing fails its perfect return, and that what are called	  And that nothing fails its perfect return, and that what are called
      lies are perfect returns,	      lies are perfect returns,	      lies are perfect returns,	      lies are perfect returns,
  And that each thing exactly represents itself and what has preceded it,	  And that each thing exactly represents itself and what has preceded it,	  And that each thing exactly represents itself and what has preceded it,	  And that each thing exactly represents itself and what has preceded it,
  And that the truth includes all, and is compact just as much as	  And that the truth includes all, and is compact just as much as	  And that the truth includes all, and is compact just as much as	  And that the truth includes all, and is compact just as much as
      space is compact,	      space is compact,	      space is compact,	      space is compact,
  And that there is no flaw or vacuum in the amount of the truth--but	  And that there is no flaw or vacuum in the amount of the truth--but	  And that there is no flaw or vacuum in the amount of the truth--but	  And that there is no flaw or vacuum in the amount of the truth--but
      that all is truth without exception;	      that all is truth without exception;	      that all is truth without exception;	      that all is truth without exception;
  And henceforth I will go celebrate any thing I see or am,	  And henceforth I will go celebrate any thing I see or am,	  And henceforth I will go celebrate any thing I see or am,	  And henceforth I will go celebrate any thing I see or am,
  And sing and laugh and deny nothing.	  And sing and laugh and deny nothing.	  And sing and laugh and deny nothing.	  And sing and laugh and deny nothing.
			
			
			
			
A Riddle Song	A Riddle Song	A Riddle Song	A Riddle Song
			
  That which eludes this verse and any verse,	  That which eludes this verse and any verse,	  That which eludes this verse and any verse,	  That which eludes this verse and any verse,
  Unheard by sharpest ear, unform'd in clearest eye or cunningest mind,	  Unheard by sharpest ear, unform'd in clearest eye or cunningest mind,	  Unheard by sharpest ear, unform'd in clearest eye or cunningest mind,	  Unheard by sharpest ear, unform'd in clearest eye or cunningest mind,
  Nor lore nor fame, nor happiness nor wealth,	  Nor lore nor fame, nor happiness nor wealth,	  Nor lore nor fame, nor happiness nor wealth,	  Nor lore nor fame, nor happiness nor wealth,
  And yet the pulse of every heart and life throughout the world incessantly,	  And yet the pulse of every heart and life throughout the world incessantly,	  And yet the pulse of every heart and life throughout the world incessantly,	  And yet the pulse of every heart and life throughout the world incessantly,
  Which you and I and all pursuing ever ever miss,	  Which you and I and all pursuing ever ever miss,	  Which you and I and all pursuing ever ever miss,	  Which you and I and all pursuing ever ever miss,
  Open but still a secret, the real of the real, an illusion,	  Open but still a secret, the real of the real, an illusion,	  Open but still a secret, the real of the real, an illusion,	  Open but still a secret, the real of the real, an illusion,
  Costless, vouchsafed to each, yet never man the owner,	  Costless, vouchsafed to each, yet never man the owner,	  Costless, vouchsafed to each, yet never man the owner,	  Costless, vouchsafed to each, yet never man the owner,
  Which poets vainly seek to put in rhyme, historians in prose,	  Which poets vainly seek to put in rhyme, historians in prose,	  Which poets vainly seek to put in rhyme, historians in prose,	  Which poets vainly seek to put in rhyme, historians in prose,
  Which sculptor never chisel'd yet, nor painter painted,	  Which sculptor never chisel'd yet, nor painter painted,	  Which sculptor never chisel'd yet, nor painter painted,	  Which sculptor never chisel'd yet, nor painter painted,
  Which vocalist never sung, nor orator nor actor ever utter'd,	  Which vocalist never sung, nor orator nor actor ever utter'd,	  Which vocalist never sung, nor orator nor actor ever utter'd,	  Which vocalist never sung, nor orator nor actor ever utter'd,
  Invoking here and now I challenge for my song.	  Invoking here and now I challenge for my song.	  Invoking here and now I challenge for my song.	  Invoking here and now I challenge for my song.
			
  Indifferently, 'mid public, private haunts, in solitude,	  Indifferently, 'mid public, private haunts, in solitude,	  Indifferently, 'mid public, private haunts, in solitude,	  Indifferently, 'mid public, private haunts, in solitude,
  Behind the mountain and the wood,	  Behind the mountain and the wood,	  Behind the mountain and the wood,	  Behind the mountain and the wood,
  Companion of the city's busiest streets, through the assemblage,	  Companion of the city's busiest streets, through the assemblage,	  Companion of the city's busiest streets, through the assemblage,	  Companion of the city's busiest streets, through the assemblage,
  It and its radiations constantly glide.	  It and its radiations constantly glide.	  It and its radiations constantly glide.	  It and its radiations constantly glide.
			
  In looks of fair unconscious babes,	  In looks of fair unconscious babes,	  In looks of fair unconscious babes,	  In looks of fair unconscious babes,
  Or strangely in the coffin'd dead,	  Or strangely in the coffin'd dead,	  Or strangely in the coffin'd dead,	  Or strangely in the coffin'd dead,
  Or show of breaking dawn or stars by night,	  Or show of breaking dawn or stars by night,	  Or show of breaking dawn or stars by night,	  Or show of breaking dawn or stars by night,
  As some dissolving delicate film of dreams,	  As some dissolving delicate film of dreams,	  As some dissolving delicate film of dreams,	  As some dissolving delicate film of dreams,
  Hiding yet lingering.	  Hiding yet lingering.	  Hiding yet lingering.	  Hiding yet lingering.
			
  Two little breaths of words comprising it,	  Two little breaths of words comprising it,	  Two little breaths of words comprising it,	  Two little breaths of words comprising it,
  Two words, yet all from first to last comprised in it.	  Two words, yet all from first to last comprised in it.	  Two words, yet all from first to last comprised in it.	  Two words, yet all from first to last comprised in it.
			
  How ardently for it!	  How ardently for it!	  How ardently for it!	  How ardently for it!
  How many ships have sail'd and sunk for it!	  How many ships have sail'd and sunk for it!	  How many ships have sail'd and sunk for it!	  How many ships have sail'd and sunk for it!
			
  How many travelers started from their homes and neer return'd!	  How many travelers started from their homes and neer return'd!	  How many travelers started from their homes and neer return'd!	  How many travelers started from their homes and neer return'd!
  How much of genius boldly staked and lost for it!	  How much of genius boldly staked and lost for it!	  How much of genius boldly staked and lost for it!	  How much of genius boldly staked and lost for it!
  What countless stores of beauty, love, ventur'd for it!	  What countless stores of beauty, love, ventur'd for it!	  What countless stores of beauty, love, ventur'd for it!	  What countless stores of beauty, love, ventur'd for it!
  How all superbest deeds since Time began are traceable to it--and	  How all superbest deeds since Time began are traceable to it--and	  How all superbest deeds since Time began are traceable to it--and	  How all superbest deeds since Time began are traceable to it--and
      shall be to the end!	      shall be to the end!	      shall be to the end!	      shall be to the end!
  How all heroic martyrdoms to it!	  How all heroic martyrdoms to it!	  How all heroic martyrdoms to it!	  How all heroic martyrdoms to it!
  How, justified by it, the horrors, evils, battles of the earth!	  How, justified by it, the horrors, evils, battles of the earth!	  How, justified by it, the horrors, evils, battles of the earth!	  How, justified by it, the horrors, evils, battles of the earth!
  How the bright fascinating lambent flames of it, in every age and	  How the bright fascinating lambent flames of it, in every age and	  How the bright fascinating lambent flames of it, in every age and	  How the bright fascinating lambent flames of it, in every age and
      land, have drawn men's eyes,	      land, have drawn men's eyes,	      land, have drawn men's eyes,	      land, have drawn men's eyes,
  Rich as a sunset on the Norway coast, the sky, the islands, and the cliffs,	  Rich as a sunset on the Norway coast, the sky, the islands, and the cliffs,	  Rich as a sunset on the Norway coast, the sky, the islands, and the cliffs,	  Rich as a sunset on the Norway coast, the sky, the islands, and the cliffs,
  Or midnight's silent glowing northern lights unreachable.	  Or midnight's silent glowing northern lights unreachable.	  Or midnight's silent glowing northern lights unreachable.	  Or midnight's silent glowing northern lights unreachable.
			
  Haply God's riddle it, so vague and yet so certain,	  Haply God's riddle it, so vague and yet so certain,	  Haply God's riddle it, so vague and yet so certain,	  Haply God's riddle it, so vague and yet so certain,
  The soul for it, and all the visible universe for it,	  The soul for it, and all the visible universe for it,	  The soul for it, and all the visible universe for it,	  The soul for it, and all the visible universe for it,
  And heaven at last for it.	  And heaven at last for it.	  And heaven at last for it.	  And heaven at last for it.
			
			
			
			
Excelsior	Excelsior	Excelsior	Excelsior
			
  Who has gone farthest? for I would go farther,	  Who has gone farthest? for I would go farther,	  Who has gone farthest? for I would go farther,	  Who has gone farthest? for I would go farther,
  And who has been just? for I would be the most just person of the earth,	  And who has been just? for I would be the most just person of the earth,	  And who has been just? for I would be the most just person of the earth,	  And who has been just? for I would be the most just person of the earth,
  And who most cautious? for I would be more cautious,	  And who most cautious? for I would be more cautious,	  And who most cautious? for I would be more cautious,	  And who most cautious? for I would be more cautious,
  And who has been happiest? O I think it is I--I think no one was	  And who has been happiest? O I think it is I--I think no one was	  And who has been happiest? O I think it is I--I think no one was	  And who has been happiest? O I think it is I--I think no one was
      ever happier than I,	      ever happier than I,	      ever happier than I,	      ever happier than I,
  And who has lavish'd all? for I lavish constantly the best I have,	  And who has lavish'd all? for I lavish constantly the best I have,	  And who has lavish'd all? for I lavish constantly the best I have,	  And who has lavish'd all? for I lavish constantly the best I have,
  And who proudest? for I think I have reason to be the proudest son	  And who proudest? for I think I have reason to be the proudest son	  And who proudest? for I think I have reason to be the proudest son	  And who proudest? for I think I have reason to be the proudest son
      alive--for I am the son of the brawny and tall-topt city,	      alive--for I am the son of the brawny and tall-topt city,	      alive--for I am the son of the brawny and tall-topt city,	      alive--for I am the son of the brawny and tall-topt city,
  And who has been bold and true? for I would be the boldest and	  And who has been bold and true? for I would be the boldest and	  And who has been bold and true? for I would be the boldest and	  And who has been bold and true? for I would be the boldest and
      truest being of the universe,	      truest being of the universe,	      truest being of the universe,	      truest being of the universe,
  And who benevolent? for I would show more benevolence than all the rest,	  And who benevolent? for I would show more benevolence than all the rest,	  And who benevolent? for I would show more benevolence than all the rest,	  And who benevolent? for I would show more benevolence than all the rest,
  And who has receiv'd the love of the most friends? for I know what	  And who has receiv'd the love of the most friends? for I know what	  And who has receiv'd the love of the most friends? for I know what	  And who has receiv'd the love of the most friends? for I know what
      it is to receive the passionate love of many friends,	      it is to receive the passionate love of many friends,	      it is to receive the passionate love of many friends,	      it is to receive the passionate love of many friends,
  And who possesses a perfect and enamour'd body? for I do not believe	  And who possesses a perfect and enamour'd body? for I do not believe	  And who possesses a perfect and enamour'd body? for I do not believe	  And who possesses a perfect and enamour'd body? for I do not believe
      any one possesses a more perfect or enamour'd body than mine,	      any one possesses a more perfect or enamour'd body than mine,	      any one possesses a more perfect or enamour'd body than mine,	      any one possesses a more perfect or enamour'd body than mine,
  And who thinks the amplest thoughts? for I would surround those thoughts,	  And who thinks the amplest thoughts? for I would surround those thoughts,	  And who thinks the amplest thoughts? for I would surround those thoughts,	  And who thinks the amplest thoughts? for I would surround those thoughts,
  And who has made hymns fit for the earth? for I am mad with	  And who has made hymns fit for the earth? for I am mad with	  And who has made hymns fit for the earth? for I am mad with	  And who has made hymns fit for the earth? for I am mad with
      devouring ecstasy to make joyous hymns for the whole earth.	      devouring ecstasy to make joyous hymns for the whole earth.	      devouring ecstasy to make joyous hymns for the whole earth.	      devouring ecstasy to make joyous hymns for the whole earth.
			
			
			
			
Ah Poverties, Wincings, and Sulky Retreats	Ah Poverties, Wincings, and Sulky Retreats	Ah Poverties, Wincings, and Sulky Retreats	Ah Poverties, Wincings, and Sulky Retreats
			
  Ah poverties, wincings, and sulky retreats,	  Ah poverties, wincings, and sulky retreats,	  Ah poverties, wincings, and sulky retreats,	  Ah poverties, wincings, and sulky retreats,
  Ah you foes that in conflict have overcome me,	  Ah you foes that in conflict have overcome me,	  Ah you foes that in conflict have overcome me,	  Ah you foes that in conflict have overcome me,
  (For what is my life or any man's life but a conflict with foes, the	  (For what is my life or any man's life but a conflict with foes, the	  (For what is my life or any man's life but a conflict with foes, the	  (For what is my life or any man's life but a conflict with foes, the
      old, the incessant war?)	      old, the incessant war?)	      old, the incessant war?)	      old, the incessant war?)
  You degradations, you tussle with passions and appetites,	  You degradations, you tussle with passions and appetites,	  You degradations, you tussle with passions and appetites,	  You degradations, you tussle with passions and appetites,
  You smarts from dissatisfied friendships, (ah wounds the sharpest of all!)	  You smarts from dissatisfied friendships, (ah wounds the sharpest of all!)	  You smarts from dissatisfied friendships, (ah wounds the sharpest of all!)	  You smarts from dissatisfied friendships, (ah wounds the sharpest of all!)
  You toil of painful and choked articulations, you meannesses,	  You toil of painful and choked articulations, you meannesses,	  You toil of painful and choked articulations, you meannesses,	  You toil of painful and choked articulations, you meannesses,
  You shallow tongue-talks at tables, (my tongue the shallowest of any;)	  You shallow tongue-talks at tables, (my tongue the shallowest of any;)	  You shallow tongue-talks at tables, (my tongue the shallowest of any;)	  You shallow tongue-talks at tables, (my tongue the shallowest of any;)
  You broken resolutions, you racking angers, you smother'd ennuis!	  You broken resolutions, you racking angers, you smother'd ennuis!	  You broken resolutions, you racking angers, you smother'd ennuis!	  You broken resolutions, you racking angers, you smother'd ennuis!
  Ah think not you finally triumph, my real self has yet to come forth,	  Ah think not you finally triumph, my real self has yet to come forth,	  Ah think not you finally triumph, my real self has yet to come forth,	  Ah think not you finally triumph, my real self has yet to come forth,
  It shall yet march forth o'ermastering, till all lies beneath me,	  It shall yet march forth o'ermastering, till all lies beneath me,	  It shall yet march forth o'ermastering, till all lies beneath me,	  It shall yet march forth o'ermastering, till all lies beneath me,
  It shall yet stand up the soldier of ultimate victory.	  It shall yet stand up the soldier of ultimate victory.	  It shall yet stand up the soldier of ultimate victory.	  It shall yet stand up the soldier of ultimate victory.
			
			
			
			
Thoughts	Thoughts	Thoughts	Thoughts
			
  Of public opinion,	  Of public opinion,	  Of public opinion,	  Of public opinion,
  Of a calm and cool fiat sooner or later, (how impassive! how certain	  Of a calm and cool fiat sooner or later, (how impassive! how certain	  Of a calm and cool fiat sooner or later, (how impassive! how certain	  Of a calm and cool fiat sooner or later, (how impassive! how certain
      and final!)	      and final!)	      and final!)	      and final!)
  Of the President with pale face asking secretly to himself, What	  Of the President with pale face asking secretly to himself, What	  Of the President with pale face asking secretly to himself, What	  Of the President with pale face asking secretly to himself, What
      will the people say at last?	      will the people say at last?	      will the people say at last?	      will the people say at last?
  Of the frivolous Judge--of the corrupt Congressman, Governor,	  Of the frivolous Judge--of the corrupt Congressman, Governor,	  Of the frivolous Judge--of the corrupt Congressman, Governor,	  Of the frivolous Judge--of the corrupt Congressman, Governor,
      Mayor--of such as these standing helpless and exposed,	      Mayor--of such as these standing helpless and exposed,	      Mayor--of such as these standing helpless and exposed,	      Mayor--of such as these standing helpless and exposed,
  Of the mumbling and screaming priest, (soon, soon deserted,)	  Of the mumbling and screaming priest, (soon, soon deserted,)	  Of the mumbling and screaming priest, (soon, soon deserted,)	  Of the mumbling and screaming priest, (soon, soon deserted,)
  Of the lessening year by year of venerableness, and of the dicta of	  Of the lessening year by year of venerableness, and of the dicta of	  Of the lessening year by year of venerableness, and of the dicta of	  Of the lessening year by year of venerableness, and of the dicta of
      officers, statutes, pulpits, schools,	      officers, statutes, pulpits, schools,	      officers, statutes, pulpits, schools,	      officers, statutes, pulpits, schools,
  Of the rising forever taller and stronger and broader of the	  Of the rising forever taller and stronger and broader of the	  Of the rising forever taller and stronger and broader of the	  Of the rising forever taller and stronger and broader of the
      intuitions of men and women, and of Self-esteem and Personality;	      intuitions of men and women, and of Self-esteem and Personality;	      intuitions of men and women, and of Self-esteem and Personality;	      intuitions of men and women, and of Self-esteem and Personality;
  Of the true New World--of the Democracies resplendent en-masse,	  Of the true New World--of the Democracies resplendent en-masse,	  Of the true New World--of the Democracies resplendent en-masse,	  Of the true New World--of the Democracies resplendent en-masse,
  Of the conformity of politics, armies, navies, to them,	  Of the conformity of politics, armies, navies, to them,	  Of the conformity of politics, armies, navies, to them,	  Of the conformity of politics, armies, navies, to them,
  Of the shining sun by them--of the inherent light, greater than the rest,	  Of the shining sun by them--of the inherent light, greater than the rest,	  Of the shining sun by them--of the inherent light, greater than the rest,	  Of the shining sun by them--of the inherent light, greater than the rest,
  Of the envelopment of all by them, and the effusion of all from them.	  Of the envelopment of all by them, and the effusion of all from them.	  Of the envelopment of all by them, and the effusion of all from them.	  Of the envelopment of all by them, and the effusion of all from them.
			
			
			
			
Mediums	Mediums	Mediums	Mediums
			
  They shall arise in the States,	  They shall arise in the States,	  They shall arise in the States,	  They shall arise in the States,
  They shall report Nature, laws, physiology, and happiness,	  They shall report Nature, laws, physiology, and happiness,	  They shall report Nature, laws, physiology, and happiness,	  They shall report Nature, laws, physiology, and happiness,
  They shall illustrate Democracy and the kosmos,	  They shall illustrate Democracy and the kosmos,	  They shall illustrate Democracy and the kosmos,	  They shall illustrate Democracy and the kosmos,
  They shall be alimentive, amative, perceptive,	  They shall be alimentive, amative, perceptive,	  They shall be alimentive, amative, perceptive,	  They shall be alimentive, amative, perceptive,
  They shall be complete women and men, their pose brawny and supple,	  They shall be complete women and men, their pose brawny and supple,	  They shall be complete women and men, their pose brawny and supple,	  They shall be complete women and men, their pose brawny and supple,
      their drink water, their blood clean and clear,	      their drink water, their blood clean and clear,	      their drink water, their blood clean and clear,	      their drink water, their blood clean and clear,
  They shall fully enjoy materialism and the sight of products, they	  They shall fully enjoy materialism and the sight of products, they	  They shall fully enjoy materialism and the sight of products, they	  They shall fully enjoy materialism and the sight of products, they
      shall enjoy the sight of the beef, lumber, bread-stuffs, of	      shall enjoy the sight of the beef, lumber, bread-stuffs, of	      shall enjoy the sight of the beef, lumber, bread-stuffs, of	      shall enjoy the sight of the beef, lumber, bread-stuffs, of
      Chicago the great city.	      Chicago the great city.	      Chicago the great city.	      Chicago the great city.
  They shall train themselves to go in public to become orators and	  They shall train themselves to go in public to become orators and	  They shall train themselves to go in public to become orators and	  They shall train themselves to go in public to become orators and
      oratresses,	      oratresses,	      oratresses,	      oratresses,
  Strong and sweet shall their tongues be, poems and materials of	  Strong and sweet shall their tongues be, poems and materials of	  Strong and sweet shall their tongues be, poems and materials of	  Strong and sweet shall their tongues be, poems and materials of
      poems shall come from their lives, they shall be makers and finders,	      poems shall come from their lives, they shall be makers and finders,	      poems shall come from their lives, they shall be makers and finders,	      poems shall come from their lives, they shall be makers and finders,
  Of them and of their works shall emerge divine conveyers, to convey gospels,	  Of them and of their works shall emerge divine conveyers, to convey gospels,	  Of them and of their works shall emerge divine conveyers, to convey gospels,	  Of them and of their works shall emerge divine conveyers, to convey gospels,
  Characters, events, retrospections, shall be convey'd in gospels,	  Characters, events, retrospections, shall be convey'd in gospels,	  Characters, events, retrospections, shall be convey'd in gospels,	  Characters, events, retrospections, shall be convey'd in gospels,
      trees, animals, waters, shall be convey'd,	      trees, animals, waters, shall be convey'd,	      trees, animals, waters, shall be convey'd,	      trees, animals, waters, shall be convey'd,
  Death, the future, the invisible faith, shall all be convey'd.	  Death, the future, the invisible faith, shall all be convey'd.	  Death, the future, the invisible faith, shall all be convey'd.	  Death, the future, the invisible faith, shall all be convey'd.
			
			
			
			
Weave in, My Hardy Life	Weave in, My Hardy Life	Weave in, My Hardy Life	Weave in, My Hardy Life
			
  Weave in, weave in, my hardy life,	  Weave in, weave in, my hardy life,	  Weave in, weave in, my hardy life,	  Weave in, weave in, my hardy life,
  Weave yet a soldier strong and full for great campaigns to come,	  Weave yet a soldier strong and full for great campaigns to come,	  Weave yet a soldier strong and full for great campaigns to come,	  Weave yet a soldier strong and full for great campaigns to come,
  Weave in red blood, weave sinews in like ropes, the senses, sight weave in,	  Weave in red blood, weave sinews in like ropes, the senses, sight weave in,	  Weave in red blood, weave sinews in like ropes, the senses, sight weave in,	  Weave in red blood, weave sinews in like ropes, the senses, sight weave in,
  Weave lasting sure, weave day and night the wet, the warp, incessant	  Weave lasting sure, weave day and night the wet, the warp, incessant	  Weave lasting sure, weave day and night the wet, the warp, incessant	  Weave lasting sure, weave day and night the wet, the warp, incessant
      weave, tire not,	      weave, tire not,	      weave, tire not,	      weave, tire not,
  (We know not what the use O life, nor know the aim, the end, nor	  (We know not what the use O life, nor know the aim, the end, nor	  (We know not what the use O life, nor know the aim, the end, nor	  (We know not what the use O life, nor know the aim, the end, nor
      really aught we know,	      really aught we know,	      really aught we know,	      really aught we know,
  But know the work, the need goes on and shall go on, the	  But know the work, the need goes on and shall go on, the	  But know the work, the need goes on and shall go on, the	  But know the work, the need goes on and shall go on, the
      death-envelop'd march of peace as well as war goes on,)	      death-envelop'd march of peace as well as war goes on,)	      death-envelop'd march of peace as well as war goes on,)	      death-envelop'd march of peace as well as war goes on,)
  For great campaigns of peace the same the wiry threads to weave,	  For great campaigns of peace the same the wiry threads to weave,	  For great campaigns of peace the same the wiry threads to weave,	  For great campaigns of peace the same the wiry threads to weave,
  We know not why or what, yet weave, forever weave.	  We know not why or what, yet weave, forever weave.	  We know not why or what, yet weave, forever weave.	  We know not why or what, yet weave, forever weave.
			
			
			
			
Spain, 1873-74	Spain, 1873-74	Spain, 1873-74	Spain, 1873-74
			
  Out of the murk of heaviest clouds,	  Out of the murk of heaviest clouds,	  Out of the murk of heaviest clouds,	  Out of the murk of heaviest clouds,
  Out of the feudal wrecks and heap'd-up skeletons of kings,	  Out of the feudal wrecks and heap'd-up skeletons of kings,	  Out of the feudal wrecks and heap'd-up skeletons of kings,	  Out of the feudal wrecks and heap'd-up skeletons of kings,
  Out of that old entire European debris, the shatter'd mummeries,	  Out of that old entire European debris, the shatter'd mummeries,	  Out of that old entire European debris, the shatter'd mummeries,	  Out of that old entire European debris, the shatter'd mummeries,
  Ruin'd cathedrals, crumble of palaces, tombs of priests,	  Ruin'd cathedrals, crumble of palaces, tombs of priests,	  Ruin'd cathedrals, crumble of palaces, tombs of priests,	  Ruin'd cathedrals, crumble of palaces, tombs of priests,
  Lo, Freedom's features fresh undimm'd look forth--the same immortal	  Lo, Freedom's features fresh undimm'd look forth--the same immortal	  Lo, Freedom's features fresh undimm'd look forth--the same immortal	  Lo, Freedom's features fresh undimm'd look forth--the same immortal
      face looks forth;	      face looks forth;	      face looks forth;	      face looks forth;
  (A glimpse as of thy Mother's face Columbia,	  (A glimpse as of thy Mother's face Columbia,	  (A glimpse as of thy Mother's face Columbia,	  (A glimpse as of thy Mother's face Columbia,
  A flash significant as of a sword,	  A flash significant as of a sword,	  A flash significant as of a sword,	  A flash significant as of a sword,
  Beaming towards thee.)	  Beaming towards thee.)	  Beaming towards thee.)	  Beaming towards thee.)
			
  Nor think we forget thee maternal;	  Nor think we forget thee maternal;	  Nor think we forget thee maternal;	  Nor think we forget thee maternal;
  Lag'd'st thou so long? shall the clouds close again upon thee?	  Lag'd'st thou so long? shall the clouds close again upon thee?	  Lag'd'st thou so long? shall the clouds close again upon thee?	  Lag'd'st thou so long? shall the clouds close again upon thee?
  Ah, but thou hast thyself now appear'd to us--we know thee,	  Ah, but thou hast thyself now appear'd to us--we know thee,	  Ah, but thou hast thyself now appear'd to us--we know thee,	  Ah, but thou hast thyself now appear'd to us--we know thee,
  Thou hast given us a sure proof, the glimpse of thyself,	  Thou hast given us a sure proof, the glimpse of thyself,	  Thou hast given us a sure proof, the glimpse of thyself,	  Thou hast given us a sure proof, the glimpse of thyself,
  Thou waitest there as everywhere thy time.	  Thou waitest there as everywhere thy time.	  Thou waitest there as everywhere thy time.	  Thou waitest there as everywhere thy time.
			
			
			
			
By Broad Potomac's Shore	By Broad Potomac's Shore	By Broad Potomac's Shore	By Broad Potomac's Shore
			
  By broad Potomac's shore, again old tongue,	  By broad Potomac's shore, again old tongue,	  By broad Potomac's shore, again old tongue,	  By broad Potomac's shore, again old tongue,
  (Still uttering, still ejaculating, canst never cease this babble?)	  (Still uttering, still ejaculating, canst never cease this babble?)	  (Still uttering, still ejaculating, canst never cease this babble?)	  (Still uttering, still ejaculating, canst never cease this babble?)
  Again old heart so gay, again to you, your sense, the full flush	  Again old heart so gay, again to you, your sense, the full flush	  Again old heart so gay, again to you, your sense, the full flush	  Again old heart so gay, again to you, your sense, the full flush
      spring returning,	      spring returning,	      spring returning,	      spring returning,
  Again the freshness and the odors, again Virginia's summer sky,	  Again the freshness and the odors, again Virginia's summer sky,	  Again the freshness and the odors, again Virginia's summer sky,	  Again the freshness and the odors, again Virginia's summer sky,
      pellucid blue and silver,	      pellucid blue and silver,	      pellucid blue and silver,	      pellucid blue and silver,
  Again the forenoon purple of the hills,	  Again the forenoon purple of the hills,	  Again the forenoon purple of the hills,	  Again the forenoon purple of the hills,
  Again the deathless grass, so noiseless soft and green,	  Again the deathless grass, so noiseless soft and green,	  Again the deathless grass, so noiseless soft and green,	  Again the deathless grass, so noiseless soft and green,
  Again the blood-red roses blooming.	  Again the blood-red roses blooming.	  Again the blood-red roses blooming.	  Again the blood-red roses blooming.
			
  Perfume this book of mine O blood-red roses!	  Perfume this book of mine O blood-red roses!	  Perfume this book of mine O blood-red roses!	  Perfume this book of mine O blood-red roses!
  Lave subtly with your waters every line Potomac!	  Lave subtly with your waters every line Potomac!	  Lave subtly with your waters every line Potomac!	  Lave subtly with your waters every line Potomac!
  Give me of you O spring, before I close, to put between its pages!	  Give me of you O spring, before I close, to put between its pages!	  Give me of you O spring, before I close, to put between its pages!	  Give me of you O spring, before I close, to put between its pages!
  O forenoon purple of the hills, before I close, of you!	  O forenoon purple of the hills, before I close, of you!	  O forenoon purple of the hills, before I close, of you!	  O forenoon purple of the hills, before I close, of you!
  O deathless grass, of you!	  O deathless grass, of you!	  O deathless grass, of you!	  O deathless grass, of you!
			
			
			
			
From Far Dakota's Canyons  [June 25, 1876]	From Far Dakota's Canyons  [June 25, 1876]	From Far Dakota's Canyons  [June 25, 1876]	From Far Dakota's Canyons  [June 25, 1876]
			
  From far Dakota's canyons,	  From far Dakota's canyons,	  From far Dakota's canyons,	  From far Dakota's canyons,
  Lands of the wild ravine, the dusky Sioux, the lonesome stretch, the	  Lands of the wild ravine, the dusky Sioux, the lonesome stretch, the	  Lands of the wild ravine, the dusky Sioux, the lonesome stretch, the	  Lands of the wild ravine, the dusky Sioux, the lonesome stretch, the
      silence,	      silence,	      silence,	      silence,
  Haply to-day a mournful wall, haply a trumpet-note for heroes.	  Haply to-day a mournful wall, haply a trumpet-note for heroes.	  Haply to-day a mournful wall, haply a trumpet-note for heroes.	  Haply to-day a mournful wall, haply a trumpet-note for heroes.
			
  The battle-bulletin,	  The battle-bulletin,	  The battle-bulletin,	  The battle-bulletin,
  The Indian ambuscade, the craft, the fatal environment,	  The Indian ambuscade, the craft, the fatal environment,	  The Indian ambuscade, the craft, the fatal environment,	  The Indian ambuscade, the craft, the fatal environment,
  The cavalry companies fighting to the last in sternest heroism,	  The cavalry companies fighting to the last in sternest heroism,	  The cavalry companies fighting to the last in sternest heroism,	  The cavalry companies fighting to the last in sternest heroism,
  In the midst of their little circle, with their slaughter'd horses	  In the midst of their little circle, with their slaughter'd horses	  In the midst of their little circle, with their slaughter'd horses	  In the midst of their little circle, with their slaughter'd horses
      for breastworks,	      for breastworks,	      for breastworks,	      for breastworks,
  The fall of Custer and all his officers and men.	  The fall of Custer and all his officers and men.	  The fall of Custer and all his officers and men.	  The fall of Custer and all his officers and men.
			
  Continues yet the old, old legend of our race,	  Continues yet the old, old legend of our race,	  Continues yet the old, old legend of our race,	  Continues yet the old, old legend of our race,
  The loftiest of life upheld by death,	  The loftiest of life upheld by death,	  The loftiest of life upheld by death,	  The loftiest of life upheld by death,
  The ancient banner perfectly maintain'd,	  The ancient banner perfectly maintain'd,	  The ancient banner perfectly maintain'd,	  The ancient banner perfectly maintain'd,
  O lesson opportune, O how I welcome thee!	  O lesson opportune, O how I welcome thee!	  O lesson opportune, O how I welcome thee!	  O lesson opportune, O how I welcome thee!
			
  As sitting in dark days,	  As sitting in dark days,	  As sitting in dark days,	  As sitting in dark days,
  Lone, sulky, through the time's thick murk looking in vain for	  Lone, sulky, through the time's thick murk looking in vain for	  Lone, sulky, through the time's thick murk looking in vain for	  Lone, sulky, through the time's thick murk looking in vain for
      light, for hope,	      light, for hope,	      light, for hope,	      light, for hope,
  From unsuspected parts a fierce and momentary proof,	  From unsuspected parts a fierce and momentary proof,	  From unsuspected parts a fierce and momentary proof,	  From unsuspected parts a fierce and momentary proof,
  (The sun there at the centre though conceal'd,	  (The sun there at the centre though conceal'd,	  (The sun there at the centre though conceal'd,	  (The sun there at the centre though conceal'd,
  Electric life forever at the centre,)	  Electric life forever at the centre,)	  Electric life forever at the centre,)	  Electric life forever at the centre,)
  Breaks forth a lightning flash.	  Breaks forth a lightning flash.	  Breaks forth a lightning flash.	  Breaks forth a lightning flash.
			
  Thou of the tawny flowing hair in battle,	  Thou of the tawny flowing hair in battle,	  Thou of the tawny flowing hair in battle,	  Thou of the tawny flowing hair in battle,
  I erewhile saw, with erect head, pressing ever in front, bearing a	  I erewhile saw, with erect head, pressing ever in front, bearing a	  I erewhile saw, with erect head, pressing ever in front, bearing a	  I erewhile saw, with erect head, pressing ever in front, bearing a
      bright sword in thy hand,	      bright sword in thy hand,	      bright sword in thy hand,	      bright sword in thy hand,
  Now ending well in death the splendid fever of thy deeds,	  Now ending well in death the splendid fever of thy deeds,	  Now ending well in death the splendid fever of thy deeds,	  Now ending well in death the splendid fever of thy deeds,
  (I bring no dirge for it or thee, I bring a glad triumphal sonnet,)	  (I bring no dirge for it or thee, I bring a glad triumphal sonnet,)	  (I bring no dirge for it or thee, I bring a glad triumphal sonnet,)	  (I bring no dirge for it or thee, I bring a glad triumphal sonnet,)
  Desperate and glorious, aye in defeat most desperate, most glorious,	  Desperate and glorious, aye in defeat most desperate, most glorious,	  Desperate and glorious, aye in defeat most desperate, most glorious,	  Desperate and glorious, aye in defeat most desperate, most glorious,
  After thy many battles in which never yielding up a gun or a color,	  After thy many battles in which never yielding up a gun or a color,	  After thy many battles in which never yielding up a gun or a color,	  After thy many battles in which never yielding up a gun or a color,
  Leaving behind thee a memory sweet to soldiers,	  Leaving behind thee a memory sweet to soldiers,	  Leaving behind thee a memory sweet to soldiers,	  Leaving behind thee a memory sweet to soldiers,
  Thou yieldest up thyself.	  Thou yieldest up thyself.	  Thou yieldest up thyself.	  Thou yieldest up thyself.
			
			
			
			
Old War-Dreams	Old War-Dreams	Old War-Dreams	Old War-Dreams
			
  In midnight sleep of many a face of anguish,	  In midnight sleep of many a face of anguish,	  In midnight sleep of many a face of anguish,	  In midnight sleep of many a face of anguish,
  Of the look at first of the mortally wounded, (of that indescribable look,)	  Of the look at first of the mortally wounded, (of that indescribable look,)	  Of the look at first of the mortally wounded, (of that indescribable look,)	  Of the look at first of the mortally wounded, (of that indescribable look,)
  Of the dead on their backs with arms extended wide,	  Of the dead on their backs with arms extended wide,	  Of the dead on their backs with arms extended wide,	  Of the dead on their backs with arms extended wide,
       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.
			
  Of scenes of Nature, fields and mountains,	  Of scenes of Nature, fields and mountains,	  Of scenes of Nature, fields and mountains,	  Of scenes of Nature, fields and mountains,
  Of skies so beauteous after a storm, and at night the moon so	  Of skies so beauteous after a storm, and at night the moon so	  Of skies so beauteous after a storm, and at night the moon so	  Of skies so beauteous after a storm, and at night the moon so
      unearthly bright,	      unearthly bright,	      unearthly bright,	      unearthly bright,
  Shining sweetly, shining down, where we dig the trenches and	  Shining sweetly, shining down, where we dig the trenches and	  Shining sweetly, shining down, where we dig the trenches and	  Shining sweetly, shining down, where we dig the trenches and
      gather the heaps,	      gather the heaps,	      gather the heaps,	      gather the heaps,
       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.
			
  Long have they pass'd, faces and trenches and fields,	  Long have they pass'd, faces and trenches and fields,	  Long have they pass'd, faces and trenches and fields,	  Long have they pass'd, faces and trenches and fields,
  Where through the carnage I moved with a callous composure, or away	  Where through the carnage I moved with a callous composure, or away	  Where through the carnage I moved with a callous composure, or away	  Where through the carnage I moved with a callous composure, or away
      from the fallen,	      from the fallen,	      from the fallen,	      from the fallen,
  Onward I sped at the time--but now of their forms at night,	  Onward I sped at the time--but now of their forms at night,	  Onward I sped at the time--but now of their forms at night,	  Onward I sped at the time--but now of their forms at night,
       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.	       I dream, I dream, I dream.
			
			
			
			
Thick-Sprinkled Bunting	Thick-Sprinkled Bunting	Thick-Sprinkled Bunting	Thick-Sprinkled Bunting
			
  Thick-sprinkled bunting! flag of stars!	  Thick-sprinkled bunting! flag of stars!	  Thick-sprinkled bunting! flag of stars!	  Thick-sprinkled bunting! flag of stars!
  Long yet your road, fateful flag--long yet your road, and lined with	  Long yet your road, fateful flag--long yet your road, and lined with	  Long yet your road, fateful flag--long yet your road, and lined with	  Long yet your road, fateful flag--long yet your road, and lined with
      bloody death,	      bloody death,	      bloody death,	      bloody death,
  For the prize I see at issue at last is the world,	  For the prize I see at issue at last is the world,	  For the prize I see at issue at last is the world,	  For the prize I see at issue at last is the world,
  All its ships and shores I see interwoven with your threads greedy banner;	  All its ships and shores I see interwoven with your threads greedy banner;	  All its ships and shores I see interwoven with your threads greedy banner;	  All its ships and shores I see interwoven with your threads greedy banner;
  Dream'd again the flags of kings, highest borne to flaunt unrival'd?	  Dream'd again the flags of kings, highest borne to flaunt unrival'd?	  Dream'd again the flags of kings, highest borne to flaunt unrival'd?	  Dream'd again the flags of kings, highest borne to flaunt unrival'd?
  O hasten flag of man--O with sure and steady step, passing highest	  O hasten flag of man--O with sure and steady step, passing highest	  O hasten flag of man--O with sure and steady step, passing highest	  O hasten flag of man--O with sure and steady step, passing highest
      flags of kings,	      flags of kings,	      flags of kings,	      flags of kings,
  Walk supreme to the heavens mighty symbol--run up above them all,	  Walk supreme to the heavens mighty symbol--run up above them all,	  Walk supreme to the heavens mighty symbol--run up above them all,	  Walk supreme to the heavens mighty symbol--run up above them all,
  Flag of stars! thick-sprinkled bunting!	  Flag of stars! thick-sprinkled bunting!	  Flag of stars! thick-sprinkled bunting!	  Flag of stars! thick-sprinkled bunting!
			
			
			
			
What Best I See in Thee	What Best I See in Thee	What Best I See in Thee	What Best I See in Thee
  [To U. S. G. return'd from his World's Tour]	  [To U. S. G. return'd from his World's Tour]	  [To U. S. G. return'd from his World's Tour]	  [To U. S. G. return'd from his World's Tour]
			
  What best I see in thee,	  What best I see in thee,	  What best I see in thee,	  What best I see in thee,
  Is not that where thou mov'st down history's great highways,	  Is not that where thou mov'st down history's great highways,	  Is not that where thou mov'st down history's great highways,	  Is not that where thou mov'st down history's great highways,
  Ever undimm'd by time shoots warlike victory's dazzle,	  Ever undimm'd by time shoots warlike victory's dazzle,	  Ever undimm'd by time shoots warlike victory's dazzle,	  Ever undimm'd by time shoots warlike victory's dazzle,
  Or that thou sat'st where Washington sat, ruling the land in peace,	  Or that thou sat'st where Washington sat, ruling the land in peace,	  Or that thou sat'st where Washington sat, ruling the land in peace,	  Or that thou sat'st where Washington sat, ruling the land in peace,
  Or thou the man whom feudal Europe feted, venerable Asia swarm'd upon,	  Or thou the man whom feudal Europe feted, venerable Asia swarm'd upon,	  Or thou the man whom feudal Europe feted, venerable Asia swarm'd upon,	  Or thou the man whom feudal Europe feted, venerable Asia swarm'd upon,
  Who walk'd with kings with even pace the round world's promenade;	  Who walk'd with kings with even pace the round world's promenade;	  Who walk'd with kings with even pace the round world's promenade;	  Who walk'd with kings with even pace the round world's promenade;
  But that in foreign lands, in all thy walks with kings,	  But that in foreign lands, in all thy walks with kings,	  But that in foreign lands, in all thy walks with kings,	  But that in foreign lands, in all thy walks with kings,
  Those prairie sovereigns of the West, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois,	  Those prairie sovereigns of the West, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois,	  Those prairie sovereigns of the West, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois,	  Those prairie sovereigns of the West, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois,
  Ohio's, Indiana's millions, comrades, farmers, soldiers, all to the front,	  Ohio's, Indiana's millions, comrades, farmers, soldiers, all to the front,	  Ohio's, Indiana's millions, comrades, farmers, soldiers, all to the front,	  Ohio's, Indiana's millions, comrades, farmers, soldiers, all to the front,
  Invisibly with thee walking with kings with even pace the round	  Invisibly with thee walking with kings with even pace the round	  Invisibly with thee walking with kings with even pace the round	  Invisibly with thee walking with kings with even pace the round
      world's promenade,	      world's promenade,	      world's promenade,	      world's promenade,
  Were all so justified.	  Were all so justified.	  Were all so justified.	  Were all so justified.
			
			
			
			
Spirit That Form'd This Scene	Spirit That Form'd This Scene	Spirit That Form'd This Scene	Spirit That Form'd This Scene
  [Written in Platte Canyon, Colorado]	  [Written in Platte Canyon, Colorado]	  [Written in Platte Canyon, Colorado]	  [Written in Platte Canyon, Colorado]
			
  Spirit that form'd this scene,	  Spirit that form'd this scene,	  Spirit that form'd this scene,	  Spirit that form'd this scene,
  These tumbled rock-piles grim and red,	  These tumbled rock-piles grim and red,	  These tumbled rock-piles grim and red,	  These tumbled rock-piles grim and red,
  These reckless heaven-ambitious peaks,	  These reckless heaven-ambitious peaks,	  These reckless heaven-ambitious peaks,	  These reckless heaven-ambitious peaks,
  These gorges, turbulent-clear streams, this naked freshness,	  These gorges, turbulent-clear streams, this naked freshness,	  These gorges, turbulent-clear streams, this naked freshness,	  These gorges, turbulent-clear streams, this naked freshness,
  These formless wild arrays, for reasons of their own,	  These formless wild arrays, for reasons of their own,	  These formless wild arrays, for reasons of their own,	  These formless wild arrays, for reasons of their own,
  I know thee, savage spirit--we have communed together,	  I know thee, savage spirit--we have communed together,	  I know thee, savage spirit--we have communed together,	  I know thee, savage spirit--we have communed together,
  Mine too such wild arrays, for reasons of their own;	  Mine too such wild arrays, for reasons of their own;	  Mine too such wild arrays, for reasons of their own;	  Mine too such wild arrays, for reasons of their own;
  Wast charged against my chants they had forgotten art?	  Wast charged against my chants they had forgotten art?	  Wast charged against my chants they had forgotten art?	  Wast charged against my chants they had forgotten art?
  To fuse within themselves its rules precise and delicatesse?	  To fuse within themselves its rules precise and delicatesse?	  To fuse within themselves its rules precise and delicatesse?	  To fuse within themselves its rules precise and delicatesse?
  The lyrist's measur'd beat, the wrought-out temple's grace--column	  The lyrist's measur'd beat, the wrought-out temple's grace--column	  The lyrist's measur'd beat, the wrought-out temple's grace--column	  The lyrist's measur'd beat, the wrought-out temple's grace--column
      and polish'd arch forgot?	      and polish'd arch forgot?	      and polish'd arch forgot?	      and polish'd arch forgot?
  But thou that revelest here--spirit that form'd this scene,	  But thou that revelest here--spirit that form'd this scene,	  But thou that revelest here--spirit that form'd this scene,	  But thou that revelest here--spirit that form'd this scene,
  They have remember'd thee.	  They have remember'd thee.	  They have remember'd thee.	  They have remember'd thee.
			
			
			
			
As I Walk These Broad Majestic Days	As I Walk These Broad Majestic Days	As I Walk These Broad Majestic Days	As I Walk These Broad Majestic Days
			
  As I walk these broad majestic days of peace,	  As I walk these broad majestic days of peace,	  As I walk these broad majestic days of peace,	  As I walk these broad majestic days of peace,
  (For the war, the struggle of blood finish'd, wherein, O terrific Ideal,	  (For the war, the struggle of blood finish'd, wherein, O terrific Ideal,	  (For the war, the struggle of blood finish'd, wherein, O terrific Ideal,	  (For the war, the struggle of blood finish'd, wherein, O terrific Ideal,
  Against vast odds erewhile having gloriously won,	  Against vast odds erewhile having gloriously won,	  Against vast odds erewhile having gloriously won,	  Against vast odds erewhile having gloriously won,
  Now thou stridest on, yet perhaps in time toward denser wars,	  Now thou stridest on, yet perhaps in time toward denser wars,	  Now thou stridest on, yet perhaps in time toward denser wars,	  Now thou stridest on, yet perhaps in time toward denser wars,
  Perhaps to engage in time in still more dreadful contests, dangers,	  Perhaps to engage in time in still more dreadful contests, dangers,	  Perhaps to engage in time in still more dreadful contests, dangers,	  Perhaps to engage in time in still more dreadful contests, dangers,
  Longer campaigns and crises, labors beyond all others,)	  Longer campaigns and crises, labors beyond all others,)	  Longer campaigns and crises, labors beyond all others,)	  Longer campaigns and crises, labors beyond all others,)
  Around me I hear that eclat of the world, politics, produce,	  Around me I hear that eclat of the world, politics, produce,	  Around me I hear that eclat of the world, politics, produce,	  Around me I hear that eclat of the world, politics, produce,
  The announcements of recognized things, science,	  The announcements of recognized things, science,	  The announcements of recognized things, science,	  The announcements of recognized things, science,
  The approved growth of cities and the spread of inventions.	  The approved growth of cities and the spread of inventions.	  The approved growth of cities and the spread of inventions.	  The approved growth of cities and the spread of inventions.
			
  I see the ships, (they will last a few years,)	  I see the ships, (they will last a few years,)	  I see the ships, (they will last a few years,)	  I see the ships, (they will last a few years,)
  The vast factories with their foremen and workmen,	  The vast factories with their foremen and workmen,	  The vast factories with their foremen and workmen,	  The vast factories with their foremen and workmen,
  And hear the indorsement of all, and do not object to it.	  And hear the indorsement of all, and do not object to it.	  And hear the indorsement of all, and do not object to it.	  And hear the indorsement of all, and do not object to it.
			
  But I too announce solid things,	  But I too announce solid things,	  But I too announce solid things,	  But I too announce solid things,
  Science, ships, politics, cities, factories, are not nothing,	  Science, ships, politics, cities, factories, are not nothing,	  Science, ships, politics, cities, factories, are not nothing,	  Science, ships, politics, cities, factories, are not nothing,
  Like a grand procession to music of distant bugles pouring,	  Like a grand procession to music of distant bugles pouring,	  Like a grand procession to music of distant bugles pouring,	  Like a grand procession to music of distant bugles pouring,
      triumphantly moving, and grander heaving in sight,	      triumphantly moving, and grander heaving in sight,	      triumphantly moving, and grander heaving in sight,	      triumphantly moving, and grander heaving in sight,
  They stand for realities--all is as it should be.	  They stand for realities--all is as it should be.	  They stand for realities--all is as it should be.	  They stand for realities--all is as it should be.
			
  Then my realities;	  Then my realities;	  Then my realities;	  Then my realities;
  What else is so real as mine?	  What else is so real as mine?	  What else is so real as mine?	  What else is so real as mine?
  Libertad and the divine average, freedom to every slave on the face	  Libertad and the divine average, freedom to every slave on the face	  Libertad and the divine average, freedom to every slave on the face	  Libertad and the divine average, freedom to every slave on the face
      of the earth,	      of the earth,	      of the earth,	      of the earth,
  The rapt promises and lumine of seers, the spiritual world, these	  The rapt promises and lumine of seers, the spiritual world, these	  The rapt promises and lumine of seers, the spiritual world, these	  The rapt promises and lumine of seers, the spiritual world, these
      centuries-lasting songs,	      centuries-lasting songs,	      centuries-lasting songs,	      centuries-lasting songs,
  And our visions, the visions of poets, the most solid announcements	  And our visions, the visions of poets, the most solid announcements	  And our visions, the visions of poets, the most solid announcements	  And our visions, the visions of poets, the most solid announcements
      of any.	      of any.	      of any.	      of any.
			
			
			
			
A Clear Midnight	A Clear Midnight	A Clear Midnight	A Clear Midnight
			
  This is thy hour O Soul, thy free flight into the wordless,	  This is thy hour O Soul, thy free flight into the wordless,	  This is thy hour O Soul, thy free flight into the wordless,	  This is thy hour O Soul, thy free flight into the wordless,
  Away from books, away from art, the day erased, the lesson done,	  Away from books, away from art, the day erased, the lesson done,	  Away from books, away from art, the day erased, the lesson done,	  Away from books, away from art, the day erased, the lesson done,
  Thee fully forth emerging, silent, gazing, pondering the themes thou	  Thee fully forth emerging, silent, gazing, pondering the themes thou	  Thee fully forth emerging, silent, gazing, pondering the themes thou	  Thee fully forth emerging, silent, gazing, pondering the themes thou
      lovest best,	      lovest best,	      lovest best,	      lovest best,
  Night, sleep, death and the stars.	  Night, sleep, death and the stars.	  Night, sleep, death and the stars.	  Night, sleep, death and the stars.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXXIII.  SONGS OF PARTING	BOOK XXXIII.  SONGS OF PARTING	BOOK XXXIII.  SONGS OF PARTING	BOOK XXXIII.  SONGS OF PARTING
			
			
As the Time Draws Nigh	As the Time Draws Nigh	As the Time Draws Nigh	As the Time Draws Nigh
			
  As the time draws nigh glooming a cloud,	  As the time draws nigh glooming a cloud,	  As the time draws nigh glooming a cloud,	  As the time draws nigh glooming a cloud,
  A dread beyond of I know not what darkens me.	  A dread beyond of I know not what darkens me.	  A dread beyond of I know not what darkens me.	  A dread beyond of I know not what darkens me.
			
  I shall go forth,	  I shall go forth,	  I shall go forth,	  I shall go forth,
  I shall traverse the States awhile, but I cannot tell whither or how long,	  I shall traverse the States awhile, but I cannot tell whither or how long,	  I shall traverse the States awhile, but I cannot tell whither or how long,	  I shall traverse the States awhile, but I cannot tell whither or how long,
  Perhaps soon some day or night while I am singing my voice will	  Perhaps soon some day or night while I am singing my voice will	  Perhaps soon some day or night while I am singing my voice will	  Perhaps soon some day or night while I am singing my voice will
      suddenly cease.	      suddenly cease.	      suddenly cease.	      suddenly cease.
			
  O book, O chants! must all then amount to but this?	  O book, O chants! must all then amount to but this?	  O book, O chants! must all then amount to but this?	  O book, O chants! must all then amount to but this?
  Must we barely arrive at this beginning of us? --and yet it is	  Must we barely arrive at this beginning of us? --and yet it is	  Must we barely arrive at this beginning of us? --and yet it is	  Must we barely arrive at this beginning of us? --and yet it is
      enough, O soul;	      enough, O soul;	      enough, O soul;	      enough, O soul;
  O soul, we have positively appear'd--that is enough.	  O soul, we have positively appear'd--that is enough.	  O soul, we have positively appear'd--that is enough.	  O soul, we have positively appear'd--that is enough.
			
			
			
			
Years of the Modern	Years of the Modern	Years of the Modern	Years of the Modern
			
  Years of the modern! years of the unperform'd!	  Years of the modern! years of the unperform'd!	  Years of the modern! years of the unperform'd!	  Years of the modern! years of the unperform'd!
  Your horizon rises, I see it parting away for more august dramas,	  Your horizon rises, I see it parting away for more august dramas,	  Your horizon rises, I see it parting away for more august dramas,	  Your horizon rises, I see it parting away for more august dramas,
  I see not America only, not only Liberty's nation but other nations	  I see not America only, not only Liberty's nation but other nations	  I see not America only, not only Liberty's nation but other nations	  I see not America only, not only Liberty's nation but other nations
      preparing,	      preparing,	      preparing,	      preparing,
  I see tremendous entrances and exits, new combinations, the solidarity	  I see tremendous entrances and exits, new combinations, the solidarity	  I see tremendous entrances and exits, new combinations, the solidarity	  I see tremendous entrances and exits, new combinations, the solidarity
      of races,	      of races,	      of races,	      of races,
  I see that force advancing with irresistible power on the world's stage,	  I see that force advancing with irresistible power on the world's stage,	  I see that force advancing with irresistible power on the world's stage,	  I see that force advancing with irresistible power on the world's stage,
  (Have the old forces, the old wars, played their parts? are the acts	  (Have the old forces, the old wars, played their parts? are the acts	  (Have the old forces, the old wars, played their parts? are the acts	  (Have the old forces, the old wars, played their parts? are the acts
      suitable to them closed?)	      suitable to them closed?)	      suitable to them closed?)	      suitable to them closed?)
  I see Freedom, completely arm'd and victorious and very haughty,	  I see Freedom, completely arm'd and victorious and very haughty,	  I see Freedom, completely arm'd and victorious and very haughty,	  I see Freedom, completely arm'd and victorious and very haughty,
      with Law on one side and Peace on the other,	      with Law on one side and Peace on the other,	      with Law on one side and Peace on the other,	      with Law on one side and Peace on the other,
  A stupendous trio all issuing forth against the idea of caste;	  A stupendous trio all issuing forth against the idea of caste;	  A stupendous trio all issuing forth against the idea of caste;	  A stupendous trio all issuing forth against the idea of caste;
  What historic denouements are these we so rapidly approach?	  What historic denouements are these we so rapidly approach?	  What historic denouements are these we so rapidly approach?	  What historic denouements are these we so rapidly approach?
  I see men marching and countermarching by swift millions,	  I see men marching and countermarching by swift millions,	  I see men marching and countermarching by swift millions,	  I see men marching and countermarching by swift millions,
  I see the frontiers and boundaries of the old aristocracies broken,	  I see the frontiers and boundaries of the old aristocracies broken,	  I see the frontiers and boundaries of the old aristocracies broken,	  I see the frontiers and boundaries of the old aristocracies broken,
  I see the landmarks of European kings removed,	  I see the landmarks of European kings removed,	  I see the landmarks of European kings removed,	  I see the landmarks of European kings removed,
  I see this day the People beginning their landmarks, (all others give way;)	  I see this day the People beginning their landmarks, (all others give way;)	  I see this day the People beginning their landmarks, (all others give way;)	  I see this day the People beginning their landmarks, (all others give way;)
  Never were such sharp questions ask'd as this day,	  Never were such sharp questions ask'd as this day,	  Never were such sharp questions ask'd as this day,	  Never were such sharp questions ask'd as this day,
  Never was average man, his soul, more energetic, more like a God,	  Never was average man, his soul, more energetic, more like a God,	  Never was average man, his soul, more energetic, more like a God,	  Never was average man, his soul, more energetic, more like a God,
  Lo, how he urges and urges, leaving the masses no rest!	  Lo, how he urges and urges, leaving the masses no rest!	  Lo, how he urges and urges, leaving the masses no rest!	  Lo, how he urges and urges, leaving the masses no rest!
  His daring foot is on land and sea everywhere, he colonizes the	  His daring foot is on land and sea everywhere, he colonizes the	  His daring foot is on land and sea everywhere, he colonizes the	  His daring foot is on land and sea everywhere, he colonizes the
      Pacific, the archipelagoes,	      Pacific, the archipelagoes,	      Pacific, the archipelagoes,	      Pacific, the archipelagoes,
  With the steamship, the electric telegraph, the newspaper, the	  With the steamship, the electric telegraph, the newspaper, the	  With the steamship, the electric telegraph, the newspaper, the	  With the steamship, the electric telegraph, the newspaper, the
      wholesale engines of war,	      wholesale engines of war,	      wholesale engines of war,	      wholesale engines of war,
  With these and the world-spreading factories he interlinks all	  With these and the world-spreading factories he interlinks all	  With these and the world-spreading factories he interlinks all	  With these and the world-spreading factories he interlinks all
      geography, all lands;	      geography, all lands;	      geography, all lands;	      geography, all lands;
  What whispers are these O lands, running ahead of you, passing under	  What whispers are these O lands, running ahead of you, passing under	  What whispers are these O lands, running ahead of you, passing under	  What whispers are these O lands, running ahead of you, passing under
      the seas?	      the seas?	      the seas?	      the seas?
  Are all nations communing? is there going to be but one heart to the globe?	  Are all nations communing? is there going to be but one heart to the globe?	  Are all nations communing? is there going to be but one heart to the globe?	  Are all nations communing? is there going to be but one heart to the globe?
  Is humanity forming en-masse? for lo, tyrants tremble, crowns grow dim,	  Is humanity forming en-masse? for lo, tyrants tremble, crowns grow dim,	  Is humanity forming en-masse? for lo, tyrants tremble, crowns grow dim,	  Is humanity forming en-masse? for lo, tyrants tremble, crowns grow dim,
  The earth, restive, confronts a new era, perhaps a general divine war,	  The earth, restive, confronts a new era, perhaps a general divine war,	  The earth, restive, confronts a new era, perhaps a general divine war,	  The earth, restive, confronts a new era, perhaps a general divine war,
  No one knows what will happen next, such portents fill the days and nights;	  No one knows what will happen next, such portents fill the days and nights;	  No one knows what will happen next, such portents fill the days and nights;	  No one knows what will happen next, such portents fill the days and nights;
  Years prophetical! the space ahead as I walk, as I vainly try to	  Years prophetical! the space ahead as I walk, as I vainly try to	  Years prophetical! the space ahead as I walk, as I vainly try to	  Years prophetical! the space ahead as I walk, as I vainly try to
      pierce it, is full of phantoms,	      pierce it, is full of phantoms,	      pierce it, is full of phantoms,	      pierce it, is full of phantoms,
  Unborn deeds, things soon to be, project their shapes around me,	  Unborn deeds, things soon to be, project their shapes around me,	  Unborn deeds, things soon to be, project their shapes around me,	  Unborn deeds, things soon to be, project their shapes around me,
  This incredible rush and heat, this strange ecstatic fever of dreams	  This incredible rush and heat, this strange ecstatic fever of dreams	  This incredible rush and heat, this strange ecstatic fever of dreams	  This incredible rush and heat, this strange ecstatic fever of dreams
      O years!	      O years!	      O years!	      O years!
  Your dreams O years, how they penetrate through me! (I know not	  Your dreams O years, how they penetrate through me! (I know not	  Your dreams O years, how they penetrate through me! (I know not	  Your dreams O years, how they penetrate through me! (I know not
      whether I sleep or wake;)	      whether I sleep or wake;)	      whether I sleep or wake;)	      whether I sleep or wake;)
  The perform'd America and Europe grow dim, retiring in shadow behind me,	  The perform'd America and Europe grow dim, retiring in shadow behind me,	  The perform'd America and Europe grow dim, retiring in shadow behind me,	  The perform'd America and Europe grow dim, retiring in shadow behind me,
  The unperform'd, more gigantic than ever, advance, advance upon me.	  The unperform'd, more gigantic than ever, advance, advance upon me.	  The unperform'd, more gigantic than ever, advance, advance upon me.	  The unperform'd, more gigantic than ever, advance, advance upon me.
			
			
			
			
Ashes of Soldiers	Ashes of Soldiers	Ashes of Soldiers	Ashes of Soldiers
			
  Ashes of soldiers South or North,	  Ashes of soldiers South or North,	  Ashes of soldiers South or North,	  Ashes of soldiers South or North,
  As I muse retrospective murmuring a chant in thought,	  As I muse retrospective murmuring a chant in thought,	  As I muse retrospective murmuring a chant in thought,	  As I muse retrospective murmuring a chant in thought,
  The war resumes, again to my sense your shapes,	  The war resumes, again to my sense your shapes,	  The war resumes, again to my sense your shapes,	  The war resumes, again to my sense your shapes,
  And again the advance of the armies.	  And again the advance of the armies.	  And again the advance of the armies.	  And again the advance of the armies.
			
  Noiseless as mists and vapors,	  Noiseless as mists and vapors,	  Noiseless as mists and vapors,	  Noiseless as mists and vapors,
  From their graves in the trenches ascending,	  From their graves in the trenches ascending,	  From their graves in the trenches ascending,	  From their graves in the trenches ascending,
  From cemeteries all through Virginia and Tennessee,	  From cemeteries all through Virginia and Tennessee,	  From cemeteries all through Virginia and Tennessee,	  From cemeteries all through Virginia and Tennessee,
  From every point of the compass out of the countless graves,	  From every point of the compass out of the countless graves,	  From every point of the compass out of the countless graves,	  From every point of the compass out of the countless graves,
  In wafted clouds, in myriads large, or squads of twos or threes or	  In wafted clouds, in myriads large, or squads of twos or threes or	  In wafted clouds, in myriads large, or squads of twos or threes or	  In wafted clouds, in myriads large, or squads of twos or threes or
      single ones they come,	      single ones they come,	      single ones they come,	      single ones they come,
  And silently gather round me.	  And silently gather round me.	  And silently gather round me.	  And silently gather round me.
			
  Now sound no note O trumpeters,	  Now sound no note O trumpeters,	  Now sound no note O trumpeters,	  Now sound no note O trumpeters,
  Not at the head of my cavalry parading on spirited horses,	  Not at the head of my cavalry parading on spirited horses,	  Not at the head of my cavalry parading on spirited horses,	  Not at the head of my cavalry parading on spirited horses,
  With sabres drawn and glistening, and carbines by their thighs, (ah	  With sabres drawn and glistening, and carbines by their thighs, (ah	  With sabres drawn and glistening, and carbines by their thighs, (ah	  With sabres drawn and glistening, and carbines by their thighs, (ah
      my brave horsemen!	      my brave horsemen!	      my brave horsemen!	      my brave horsemen!
  My handsome tan-faced horsemen! what life, what joy and pride,	  My handsome tan-faced horsemen! what life, what joy and pride,	  My handsome tan-faced horsemen! what life, what joy and pride,	  My handsome tan-faced horsemen! what life, what joy and pride,
  With all the perils were yours.)	  With all the perils were yours.)	  With all the perils were yours.)	  With all the perils were yours.)
			
  Nor you drummers, neither at reveille at dawn,	  Nor you drummers, neither at reveille at dawn,	  Nor you drummers, neither at reveille at dawn,	  Nor you drummers, neither at reveille at dawn,
  Nor the long roll alarming the camp, nor even the muffled beat for burial,	  Nor the long roll alarming the camp, nor even the muffled beat for burial,	  Nor the long roll alarming the camp, nor even the muffled beat for burial,	  Nor the long roll alarming the camp, nor even the muffled beat for burial,
  Nothing from you this time O drummers bearing my warlike drums.	  Nothing from you this time O drummers bearing my warlike drums.	  Nothing from you this time O drummers bearing my warlike drums.	  Nothing from you this time O drummers bearing my warlike drums.
			
  But aside from these and the marts of wealth and the crowded promenade,	  But aside from these and the marts of wealth and the crowded promenade,	  But aside from these and the marts of wealth and the crowded promenade,	  But aside from these and the marts of wealth and the crowded promenade,
  Admitting around me comrades close unseen by the rest and voiceless,	  Admitting around me comrades close unseen by the rest and voiceless,	  Admitting around me comrades close unseen by the rest and voiceless,	  Admitting around me comrades close unseen by the rest and voiceless,
  The slain elate and alive again, the dust and debris alive,	  The slain elate and alive again, the dust and debris alive,	  The slain elate and alive again, the dust and debris alive,	  The slain elate and alive again, the dust and debris alive,
  I chant this chant of my silent soul in the name of all dead soldiers.	  I chant this chant of my silent soul in the name of all dead soldiers.	  I chant this chant of my silent soul in the name of all dead soldiers.	  I chant this chant of my silent soul in the name of all dead soldiers.
			
  Faces so pale with wondrous eyes, very dear, gather closer yet,	  Faces so pale with wondrous eyes, very dear, gather closer yet,	  Faces so pale with wondrous eyes, very dear, gather closer yet,	  Faces so pale with wondrous eyes, very dear, gather closer yet,
  Draw close, but speak not.	  Draw close, but speak not.	  Draw close, but speak not.	  Draw close, but speak not.
			
  Phantoms of countless lost,	  Phantoms of countless lost,	  Phantoms of countless lost,	  Phantoms of countless lost,
  Invisible to the rest henceforth become my companions,	  Invisible to the rest henceforth become my companions,	  Invisible to the rest henceforth become my companions,	  Invisible to the rest henceforth become my companions,
  Follow me ever--desert me not while I live.	  Follow me ever--desert me not while I live.	  Follow me ever--desert me not while I live.	  Follow me ever--desert me not while I live.
			
  Sweet are the blooming cheeks of the living--sweet are the musical	  Sweet are the blooming cheeks of the living--sweet are the musical	  Sweet are the blooming cheeks of the living--sweet are the musical	  Sweet are the blooming cheeks of the living--sweet are the musical
      voices sounding,	      voices sounding,	      voices sounding,	      voices sounding,
  But sweet, ah sweet, are the dead with their silent eyes.	  But sweet, ah sweet, are the dead with their silent eyes.	  But sweet, ah sweet, are the dead with their silent eyes.	  But sweet, ah sweet, are the dead with their silent eyes.
			
  Dearest comrades, all is over and long gone,	  Dearest comrades, all is over and long gone,	  Dearest comrades, all is over and long gone,	  Dearest comrades, all is over and long gone,
  But love is not over--and what love, O comrades!	  But love is not over--and what love, O comrades!	  But love is not over--and what love, O comrades!	  But love is not over--and what love, O comrades!
  Perfume from battle-fields rising, up from the foetor arising.	  Perfume from battle-fields rising, up from the foetor arising.	  Perfume from battle-fields rising, up from the foetor arising.	  Perfume from battle-fields rising, up from the foetor arising.
			
  Perfume therefore my chant, O love, immortal love,	  Perfume therefore my chant, O love, immortal love,	  Perfume therefore my chant, O love, immortal love,	  Perfume therefore my chant, O love, immortal love,
  Give me to bathe the memories of all dead soldiers,	  Give me to bathe the memories of all dead soldiers,	  Give me to bathe the memories of all dead soldiers,	  Give me to bathe the memories of all dead soldiers,
  Shroud them, embalm them, cover them all over with tender pride.	  Shroud them, embalm them, cover them all over with tender pride.	  Shroud them, embalm them, cover them all over with tender pride.	  Shroud them, embalm them, cover them all over with tender pride.
			
  Perfume all--make all wholesome,	  Perfume all--make all wholesome,	  Perfume all--make all wholesome,	  Perfume all--make all wholesome,
  Make these ashes to nourish and blossom,	  Make these ashes to nourish and blossom,	  Make these ashes to nourish and blossom,	  Make these ashes to nourish and blossom,
  O love, solve all, fructify all with the last chemistry.	  O love, solve all, fructify all with the last chemistry.	  O love, solve all, fructify all with the last chemistry.	  O love, solve all, fructify all with the last chemistry.
			
  Give me exhaustless, make me a fountain,	  Give me exhaustless, make me a fountain,	  Give me exhaustless, make me a fountain,	  Give me exhaustless, make me a fountain,
  That I exhale love from me wherever I go like a moist perennial dew,	  That I exhale love from me wherever I go like a moist perennial dew,	  That I exhale love from me wherever I go like a moist perennial dew,	  That I exhale love from me wherever I go like a moist perennial dew,
  For the ashes of all dead soldiers South or North.	  For the ashes of all dead soldiers South or North.	  For the ashes of all dead soldiers South or North.	  For the ashes of all dead soldiers South or North.
			
			
			
			
Thoughts	Thoughts	Thoughts	Thoughts
			
       1	       1	       1	       1
  Of these years I sing,	  Of these years I sing,	  Of these years I sing,	  Of these years I sing,
  How they pass and have pass'd through convuls'd pains, as through	  How they pass and have pass'd through convuls'd pains, as through	  How they pass and have pass'd through convuls'd pains, as through	  How they pass and have pass'd through convuls'd pains, as through
      parturitions,	      parturitions,	      parturitions,	      parturitions,
  How America illustrates birth, muscular youth, the promise, the sure	  How America illustrates birth, muscular youth, the promise, the sure	  How America illustrates birth, muscular youth, the promise, the sure	  How America illustrates birth, muscular youth, the promise, the sure
      fulfilment, the absolute success, despite of people--illustrates	      fulfilment, the absolute success, despite of people--illustrates	      fulfilment, the absolute success, despite of people--illustrates	      fulfilment, the absolute success, despite of people--illustrates
      evil as well as good,	      evil as well as good,	      evil as well as good,	      evil as well as good,
  The vehement struggle so fierce for unity in one's-self,	  The vehement struggle so fierce for unity in one's-self,	  The vehement struggle so fierce for unity in one's-self,	  The vehement struggle so fierce for unity in one's-self,
  How many hold despairingly yet to the models departed, caste, myths,	  How many hold despairingly yet to the models departed, caste, myths,	  How many hold despairingly yet to the models departed, caste, myths,	  How many hold despairingly yet to the models departed, caste, myths,
      obedience, compulsion, and to infidelity,	      obedience, compulsion, and to infidelity,	      obedience, compulsion, and to infidelity,	      obedience, compulsion, and to infidelity,
  How few see the arrived models, the athletes, the Western States, or	  How few see the arrived models, the athletes, the Western States, or	  How few see the arrived models, the athletes, the Western States, or	  How few see the arrived models, the athletes, the Western States, or
      see freedom or spirituality, or hold any faith in results,	      see freedom or spirituality, or hold any faith in results,	      see freedom or spirituality, or hold any faith in results,	      see freedom or spirituality, or hold any faith in results,
  (But I see the athletes, and I see the results of the war glorious	  (But I see the athletes, and I see the results of the war glorious	  (But I see the athletes, and I see the results of the war glorious	  (But I see the athletes, and I see the results of the war glorious
      and inevitable, and they again leading to other results.)	      and inevitable, and they again leading to other results.)	      and inevitable, and they again leading to other results.)	      and inevitable, and they again leading to other results.)
			
  How the great cities appear--how the Democratic masses, turbulent,	  How the great cities appear--how the Democratic masses, turbulent,	  How the great cities appear--how the Democratic masses, turbulent,	  How the great cities appear--how the Democratic masses, turbulent,
      willful, as I love them,	      willful, as I love them,	      willful, as I love them,	      willful, as I love them,
  How the whirl, the contest, the wrestle of evil with good, the	  How the whirl, the contest, the wrestle of evil with good, the	  How the whirl, the contest, the wrestle of evil with good, the	  How the whirl, the contest, the wrestle of evil with good, the
      sounding and resounding, keep on and on,	      sounding and resounding, keep on and on,	      sounding and resounding, keep on and on,	      sounding and resounding, keep on and on,
  How society waits unform'd, and is for a while between things ended	  How society waits unform'd, and is for a while between things ended	  How society waits unform'd, and is for a while between things ended	  How society waits unform'd, and is for a while between things ended
      and things begun,	      and things begun,	      and things begun,	      and things begun,
  How America is the continent of glories, and of the triumph of	  How America is the continent of glories, and of the triumph of	  How America is the continent of glories, and of the triumph of	  How America is the continent of glories, and of the triumph of
      freedom and of the Democracies, and of the fruits of society, and	      freedom and of the Democracies, and of the fruits of society, and	      freedom and of the Democracies, and of the fruits of society, and	      freedom and of the Democracies, and of the fruits of society, and
      of all that is begun,	      of all that is begun,	      of all that is begun,	      of all that is begun,
  And how the States are complete in themselves--and how all triumphs	  And how the States are complete in themselves--and how all triumphs	  And how the States are complete in themselves--and how all triumphs	  And how the States are complete in themselves--and how all triumphs
      and glories are complete in themselves, to lead onward,	      and glories are complete in themselves, to lead onward,	      and glories are complete in themselves, to lead onward,	      and glories are complete in themselves, to lead onward,
  And how these of mine and of the States will in their turn be	  And how these of mine and of the States will in their turn be	  And how these of mine and of the States will in their turn be	  And how these of mine and of the States will in their turn be
      convuls'd, and serve other parturitions and transitions,	      convuls'd, and serve other parturitions and transitions,	      convuls'd, and serve other parturitions and transitions,	      convuls'd, and serve other parturitions and transitions,
  And how all people, sights, combinations, the democratic masses too,	  And how all people, sights, combinations, the democratic masses too,	  And how all people, sights, combinations, the democratic masses too,	  And how all people, sights, combinations, the democratic masses too,
      serve--and how every fact, and war itself, with all its horrors,	      serve--and how every fact, and war itself, with all its horrors,	      serve--and how every fact, and war itself, with all its horrors,	      serve--and how every fact, and war itself, with all its horrors,
      serves,	      serves,	      serves,	      serves,
  And how now or at any time each serves the exquisite transition of death.	  And how now or at any time each serves the exquisite transition of death.	  And how now or at any time each serves the exquisite transition of death.	  And how now or at any time each serves the exquisite transition of death.
			
       2	       2	       2	       2
  Of seeds dropping into the ground, of births,	  Of seeds dropping into the ground, of births,	  Of seeds dropping into the ground, of births,	  Of seeds dropping into the ground, of births,
  Of the steady concentration of America, inland, upward, to	  Of the steady concentration of America, inland, upward, to	  Of the steady concentration of America, inland, upward, to	  Of the steady concentration of America, inland, upward, to
      impregnable and swarming places,	      impregnable and swarming places,	      impregnable and swarming places,	      impregnable and swarming places,
  Of what Indiana, Kentucky, Arkansas, and the rest, are to be,	  Of what Indiana, Kentucky, Arkansas, and the rest, are to be,	  Of what Indiana, Kentucky, Arkansas, and the rest, are to be,	  Of what Indiana, Kentucky, Arkansas, and the rest, are to be,
  Of what a few years will show there in Nebraska, Colorado, Nevada,	  Of what a few years will show there in Nebraska, Colorado, Nevada,	  Of what a few years will show there in Nebraska, Colorado, Nevada,	  Of what a few years will show there in Nebraska, Colorado, Nevada,
      and the rest,	      and the rest,	      and the rest,	      and the rest,
  (Or afar, mounting the Northern Pacific to Sitka or Aliaska,)	  (Or afar, mounting the Northern Pacific to Sitka or Aliaska,)	  (Or afar, mounting the Northern Pacific to Sitka or Aliaska,)	  (Or afar, mounting the Northern Pacific to Sitka or Aliaska,)
  Of what the feuillage of America is the preparation for--and of what	  Of what the feuillage of America is the preparation for--and of what	  Of what the feuillage of America is the preparation for--and of what	  Of what the feuillage of America is the preparation for--and of what
      all sights, North, South, East and West, are,	      all sights, North, South, East and West, are,	      all sights, North, South, East and West, are,	      all sights, North, South, East and West, are,
  Of this Union welded in blood, of the solemn price paid, of the	  Of this Union welded in blood, of the solemn price paid, of the	  Of this Union welded in blood, of the solemn price paid, of the	  Of this Union welded in blood, of the solemn price paid, of the
      unnamed lost ever present in my mind;	      unnamed lost ever present in my mind;	      unnamed lost ever present in my mind;	      unnamed lost ever present in my mind;
  Of the temporary use of materials for identity's sake,	  Of the temporary use of materials for identity's sake,	  Of the temporary use of materials for identity's sake,	  Of the temporary use of materials for identity's sake,
  Of the present, passing, departing--of the growth of completer men	  Of the present, passing, departing--of the growth of completer men	  Of the present, passing, departing--of the growth of completer men	  Of the present, passing, departing--of the growth of completer men
      than any yet,	      than any yet,	      than any yet,	      than any yet,
  Of all sloping down there where the fresh free giver the mother, the	  Of all sloping down there where the fresh free giver the mother, the	  Of all sloping down there where the fresh free giver the mother, the	  Of all sloping down there where the fresh free giver the mother, the
      Mississippi flows,	      Mississippi flows,	      Mississippi flows,	      Mississippi flows,
  Of mighty inland cities yet unsurvey'd and unsuspected,	  Of mighty inland cities yet unsurvey'd and unsuspected,	  Of mighty inland cities yet unsurvey'd and unsuspected,	  Of mighty inland cities yet unsurvey'd and unsuspected,
  Of the new and good names, of the modern developments, of	  Of the new and good names, of the modern developments, of	  Of the new and good names, of the modern developments, of	  Of the new and good names, of the modern developments, of
      inalienable homesteads,	      inalienable homesteads,	      inalienable homesteads,	      inalienable homesteads,
  Of a free and original life there, of simple diet and clean and	  Of a free and original life there, of simple diet and clean and	  Of a free and original life there, of simple diet and clean and	  Of a free and original life there, of simple diet and clean and
      sweet blood,	      sweet blood,	      sweet blood,	      sweet blood,
  Of litheness, majestic faces, clear eyes, and perfect physique there,	  Of litheness, majestic faces, clear eyes, and perfect physique there,	  Of litheness, majestic faces, clear eyes, and perfect physique there,	  Of litheness, majestic faces, clear eyes, and perfect physique there,
  Of immense spiritual results future years far West, each side of the	  Of immense spiritual results future years far West, each side of the	  Of immense spiritual results future years far West, each side of the	  Of immense spiritual results future years far West, each side of the
      Anahuacs,	      Anahuacs,	      Anahuacs,	      Anahuacs,
  Of these songs, well understood there, (being made for that area,)	  Of these songs, well understood there, (being made for that area,)	  Of these songs, well understood there, (being made for that area,)	  Of these songs, well understood there, (being made for that area,)
  Of the native scorn of grossness and gain there,	  Of the native scorn of grossness and gain there,	  Of the native scorn of grossness and gain there,	  Of the native scorn of grossness and gain there,
  (O it lurks in me night and day--what is gain after all to savageness	  (O it lurks in me night and day--what is gain after all to savageness	  (O it lurks in me night and day--what is gain after all to savageness	  (O it lurks in me night and day--what is gain after all to savageness
      and freedom?)	      and freedom?)	      and freedom?)	      and freedom?)
			
			
			
			
Song at Sunset	Song at Sunset	Song at Sunset	Song at Sunset
			
  Splendor of ended day floating and filling me,	  Splendor of ended day floating and filling me,	  Splendor of ended day floating and filling me,	  Splendor of ended day floating and filling me,
  Hour prophetic, hour resuming the past,	  Hour prophetic, hour resuming the past,	  Hour prophetic, hour resuming the past,	  Hour prophetic, hour resuming the past,
  Inflating my throat, you divine average,	  Inflating my throat, you divine average,	  Inflating my throat, you divine average,	  Inflating my throat, you divine average,
  You earth and life till the last ray gleams I sing.	  You earth and life till the last ray gleams I sing.	  You earth and life till the last ray gleams I sing.	  You earth and life till the last ray gleams I sing.
			
  Open mouth of my soul uttering gladness,	  Open mouth of my soul uttering gladness,	  Open mouth of my soul uttering gladness,	  Open mouth of my soul uttering gladness,
  Eyes of my soul seeing perfection,	  Eyes of my soul seeing perfection,	  Eyes of my soul seeing perfection,	  Eyes of my soul seeing perfection,
  Natural life of me faithfully praising things,	  Natural life of me faithfully praising things,	  Natural life of me faithfully praising things,	  Natural life of me faithfully praising things,
  Corroborating forever the triumph of things.	  Corroborating forever the triumph of things.	  Corroborating forever the triumph of things.	  Corroborating forever the triumph of things.
			
  Illustrious every one!	  Illustrious every one!	  Illustrious every one!	  Illustrious every one!
  Illustrious what we name space, sphere of unnumber'd spirits,	  Illustrious what we name space, sphere of unnumber'd spirits,	  Illustrious what we name space, sphere of unnumber'd spirits,	  Illustrious what we name space, sphere of unnumber'd spirits,
  Illustrious the mystery of motion in all beings, even the tiniest insect,	  Illustrious the mystery of motion in all beings, even the tiniest insect,	  Illustrious the mystery of motion in all beings, even the tiniest insect,	  Illustrious the mystery of motion in all beings, even the tiniest insect,
  Illustrious the attribute of speech, the senses, the body,	  Illustrious the attribute of speech, the senses, the body,	  Illustrious the attribute of speech, the senses, the body,	  Illustrious the attribute of speech, the senses, the body,
  Illustrious the passing light--illustrious the pale reflection on	  Illustrious the passing light--illustrious the pale reflection on	  Illustrious the passing light--illustrious the pale reflection on	  Illustrious the passing light--illustrious the pale reflection on
      the new moon in the western sky,	      the new moon in the western sky,	      the new moon in the western sky,	      the new moon in the western sky,
  Illustrious whatever I see or hear or touch, to the last.	  Illustrious whatever I see or hear or touch, to the last.	  Illustrious whatever I see or hear or touch, to the last.	  Illustrious whatever I see or hear or touch, to the last.
			
  Good in all,	  Good in all,	  Good in all,	  Good in all,
  In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,	  In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,	  In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,	  In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,
  In the annual return of the seasons,	  In the annual return of the seasons,	  In the annual return of the seasons,	  In the annual return of the seasons,
  In the hilarity of youth,	  In the hilarity of youth,	  In the hilarity of youth,	  In the hilarity of youth,
  In the strength and flush of manhood,	  In the strength and flush of manhood,	  In the strength and flush of manhood,	  In the strength and flush of manhood,
  In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,	  In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,	  In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,	  In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,
  In the superb vistas of death.	  In the superb vistas of death.	  In the superb vistas of death.	  In the superb vistas of death.
			
  Wonderful to depart!	  Wonderful to depart!	  Wonderful to depart!	  Wonderful to depart!
  Wonderful to be here!	  Wonderful to be here!	  Wonderful to be here!	  Wonderful to be here!
  The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood!	  The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood!	  The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood!	  The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood!
  To breathe the air, how delicious!	  To breathe the air, how delicious!	  To breathe the air, how delicious!	  To breathe the air, how delicious!
  To speak--to walk--to seize something by the hand!	  To speak--to walk--to seize something by the hand!	  To speak--to walk--to seize something by the hand!	  To speak--to walk--to seize something by the hand!
  To prepare for sleep, for bed, to look on my rose-color'd flesh!	  To prepare for sleep, for bed, to look on my rose-color'd flesh!	  To prepare for sleep, for bed, to look on my rose-color'd flesh!	  To prepare for sleep, for bed, to look on my rose-color'd flesh!
  To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large!	  To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large!	  To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large!	  To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large!
  To be this incredible God I am!	  To be this incredible God I am!	  To be this incredible God I am!	  To be this incredible God I am!
  To have gone forth among other Gods, these men and women I love.	  To have gone forth among other Gods, these men and women I love.	  To have gone forth among other Gods, these men and women I love.	  To have gone forth among other Gods, these men and women I love.
			
  Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself	  Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself	  Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself	  Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself
  How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around!	  How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around!	  How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around!	  How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around!
  How the clouds pass silently overhead!	  How the clouds pass silently overhead!	  How the clouds pass silently overhead!	  How the clouds pass silently overhead!
  How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on!	  How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on!	  How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on!	  How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on!
  How the water sports and sings! (surely it is alive!)	  How the water sports and sings! (surely it is alive!)	  How the water sports and sings! (surely it is alive!)	  How the water sports and sings! (surely it is alive!)
  How the trees rise and stand up, with strong trunks, with branches	  How the trees rise and stand up, with strong trunks, with branches	  How the trees rise and stand up, with strong trunks, with branches	  How the trees rise and stand up, with strong trunks, with branches
      and leaves!	      and leaves!	      and leaves!	      and leaves!
  (Surely there is something more in each of the trees, some living soul.)	  (Surely there is something more in each of the trees, some living soul.)	  (Surely there is something more in each of the trees, some living soul.)	  (Surely there is something more in each of the trees, some living soul.)
			
  O amazement of things--even the least particle!	  O amazement of things--even the least particle!	  O amazement of things--even the least particle!	  O amazement of things--even the least particle!
  O spirituality of things!	  O spirituality of things!	  O spirituality of things!	  O spirituality of things!
  O strain musical flowing through ages and continents, now reaching	  O strain musical flowing through ages and continents, now reaching	  O strain musical flowing through ages and continents, now reaching	  O strain musical flowing through ages and continents, now reaching
      me and America!	      me and America!	      me and America!	      me and America!
  I take your strong chords, intersperse them, and cheerfully pass	  I take your strong chords, intersperse them, and cheerfully pass	  I take your strong chords, intersperse them, and cheerfully pass	  I take your strong chords, intersperse them, and cheerfully pass
      them forward.	      them forward.	      them forward.	      them forward.
			
  I too carol the sun, usher'd or at noon, or as now, setting,	  I too carol the sun, usher'd or at noon, or as now, setting,	  I too carol the sun, usher'd or at noon, or as now, setting,	  I too carol the sun, usher'd or at noon, or as now, setting,
  I too throb to the brain and beauty of the earth and of all the	  I too throb to the brain and beauty of the earth and of all the	  I too throb to the brain and beauty of the earth and of all the	  I too throb to the brain and beauty of the earth and of all the
      growths of the earth,	      growths of the earth,	      growths of the earth,	      growths of the earth,
  I too have felt the resistless call of myself.	  I too have felt the resistless call of myself.	  I too have felt the resistless call of myself.	  I too have felt the resistless call of myself.
			
  As I steam'd down the Mississippi,	  As I steam'd down the Mississippi,	  As I steam'd down the Mississippi,	  As I steam'd down the Mississippi,
  As I wander'd over the prairies,	  As I wander'd over the prairies,	  As I wander'd over the prairies,	  As I wander'd over the prairies,
  As I have lived, as I have look'd through my windows my eyes,	  As I have lived, as I have look'd through my windows my eyes,	  As I have lived, as I have look'd through my windows my eyes,	  As I have lived, as I have look'd through my windows my eyes,
  As I went forth in the morning, as I beheld the light breaking in the east,	  As I went forth in the morning, as I beheld the light breaking in the east,	  As I went forth in the morning, as I beheld the light breaking in the east,	  As I went forth in the morning, as I beheld the light breaking in the east,
  As I bathed on the beach of the Eastern Sea, and again on the beach	  As I bathed on the beach of the Eastern Sea, and again on the beach	  As I bathed on the beach of the Eastern Sea, and again on the beach	  As I bathed on the beach of the Eastern Sea, and again on the beach
      of the Western Sea,	      of the Western Sea,	      of the Western Sea,	      of the Western Sea,
  As I roam'd the streets of inland Chicago, whatever streets I have roam'd,	  As I roam'd the streets of inland Chicago, whatever streets I have roam'd,	  As I roam'd the streets of inland Chicago, whatever streets I have roam'd,	  As I roam'd the streets of inland Chicago, whatever streets I have roam'd,
  Or cities or silent woods, or even amid the sights of war,	  Or cities or silent woods, or even amid the sights of war,	  Or cities or silent woods, or even amid the sights of war,	  Or cities or silent woods, or even amid the sights of war,
  Wherever I have been I have charged myself with contentment and triumph.	  Wherever I have been I have charged myself with contentment and triumph.	  Wherever I have been I have charged myself with contentment and triumph.	  Wherever I have been I have charged myself with contentment and triumph.
			
  I sing to the last the equalities modern or old,	  I sing to the last the equalities modern or old,	  I sing to the last the equalities modern or old,	  I sing to the last the equalities modern or old,
  I sing the endless finales of things,	  I sing the endless finales of things,	  I sing the endless finales of things,	  I sing the endless finales of things,
  I say Nature continues, glory continues,	  I say Nature continues, glory continues,	  I say Nature continues, glory continues,	  I say Nature continues, glory continues,
  I praise with electric voice,	  I praise with electric voice,	  I praise with electric voice,	  I praise with electric voice,
  For I do not see one imperfection in the universe,	  For I do not see one imperfection in the universe,	  For I do not see one imperfection in the universe,	  For I do not see one imperfection in the universe,
  And I do not see one cause or result lamentable at last in the universe.	  And I do not see one cause or result lamentable at last in the universe.	  And I do not see one cause or result lamentable at last in the universe.	  And I do not see one cause or result lamentable at last in the universe.
			
  O setting sun! though the time has come,	  O setting sun! though the time has come,	  O setting sun! though the time has come,	  O setting sun! though the time has come,
  I still warble under you, if none else does, unmitigated adoration.	  I still warble under you, if none else does, unmitigated adoration.	  I still warble under you, if none else does, unmitigated adoration.	  I still warble under you, if none else does, unmitigated adoration.
			
			
			
			
As at Thy Portals Also Death	As at Thy Portals Also Death	As at Thy Portals Also Death	As at Thy Portals Also Death
			
  As at thy portals also death,	  As at thy portals also death,	  As at thy portals also death,	  As at thy portals also death,
  Entering thy sovereign, dim, illimitable grounds,	  Entering thy sovereign, dim, illimitable grounds,	  Entering thy sovereign, dim, illimitable grounds,	  Entering thy sovereign, dim, illimitable grounds,
  To memories of my mother, to the divine blending, maternity,	  To memories of my mother, to the divine blending, maternity,	  To memories of my mother, to the divine blending, maternity,	  To memories of my mother, to the divine blending, maternity,
  To her, buried and gone, yet buried not, gone not from me,	  To her, buried and gone, yet buried not, gone not from me,	  To her, buried and gone, yet buried not, gone not from me,	  To her, buried and gone, yet buried not, gone not from me,
  (I see again the calm benignant face fresh and beautiful still,	  (I see again the calm benignant face fresh and beautiful still,	  (I see again the calm benignant face fresh and beautiful still,	  (I see again the calm benignant face fresh and beautiful still,
  I sit by the form in the coffin,	  I sit by the form in the coffin,	  I sit by the form in the coffin,	  I sit by the form in the coffin,
  I kiss and kiss convulsively again the sweet old lips, the cheeks,	  I kiss and kiss convulsively again the sweet old lips, the cheeks,	  I kiss and kiss convulsively again the sweet old lips, the cheeks,	  I kiss and kiss convulsively again the sweet old lips, the cheeks,
      the closed eyes in the coffin;)	      the closed eyes in the coffin;)	      the closed eyes in the coffin;)	      the closed eyes in the coffin;)
  To her, the ideal woman, practical, spiritual, of all of earth,	  To her, the ideal woman, practical, spiritual, of all of earth,	  To her, the ideal woman, practical, spiritual, of all of earth,	  To her, the ideal woman, practical, spiritual, of all of earth,
      life, love, to me the best,	      life, love, to me the best,	      life, love, to me the best,	      life, love, to me the best,
  I grave a monumental line, before I go, amid these songs,	  I grave a monumental line, before I go, amid these songs,	  I grave a monumental line, before I go, amid these songs,	  I grave a monumental line, before I go, amid these songs,
  And set a tombstone here.	  And set a tombstone here.	  And set a tombstone here.	  And set a tombstone here.
			
			
			
			
My Legacy	My Legacy	My Legacy	My Legacy
			
  The business man the acquirer vast,	  The business man the acquirer vast,	  The business man the acquirer vast,	  The business man the acquirer vast,
  After assiduous years surveying results, preparing for departure,	  After assiduous years surveying results, preparing for departure,	  After assiduous years surveying results, preparing for departure,	  After assiduous years surveying results, preparing for departure,
  Devises houses and lands to his children, bequeaths stocks, goods,	  Devises houses and lands to his children, bequeaths stocks, goods,	  Devises houses and lands to his children, bequeaths stocks, goods,	  Devises houses and lands to his children, bequeaths stocks, goods,
      funds for a school or hospital,	      funds for a school or hospital,	      funds for a school or hospital,	      funds for a school or hospital,
  Leaves money to certain companions to buy tokens, souvenirs of gems	  Leaves money to certain companions to buy tokens, souvenirs of gems	  Leaves money to certain companions to buy tokens, souvenirs of gems	  Leaves money to certain companions to buy tokens, souvenirs of gems
      and gold.	      and gold.	      and gold.	      and gold.
			
  But I, my life surveying, closing,	  But I, my life surveying, closing,	  But I, my life surveying, closing,	  But I, my life surveying, closing,
  With nothing to show to devise from its idle years,	  With nothing to show to devise from its idle years,	  With nothing to show to devise from its idle years,	  With nothing to show to devise from its idle years,
  Nor houses nor lands, nor tokens of gems or gold for my friends,	  Nor houses nor lands, nor tokens of gems or gold for my friends,	  Nor houses nor lands, nor tokens of gems or gold for my friends,	  Nor houses nor lands, nor tokens of gems or gold for my friends,
  Yet certain remembrances of the war for you, and after you,	  Yet certain remembrances of the war for you, and after you,	  Yet certain remembrances of the war for you, and after you,	  Yet certain remembrances of the war for you, and after you,
  And little souvenirs of camps and soldiers, with my love,	  And little souvenirs of camps and soldiers, with my love,	  And little souvenirs of camps and soldiers, with my love,	  And little souvenirs of camps and soldiers, with my love,
  I bind together and bequeath in this bundle of songs.	  I bind together and bequeath in this bundle of songs.	  I bind together and bequeath in this bundle of songs.	  I bind together and bequeath in this bundle of songs.
			
			
			
			
Pensive on Her Dead Gazing	Pensive on Her Dead Gazing	Pensive on Her Dead Gazing	Pensive on Her Dead Gazing
			
  Pensive on her dead gazing I heard the Mother of All,	  Pensive on her dead gazing I heard the Mother of All,	  Pensive on her dead gazing I heard the Mother of All,	  Pensive on her dead gazing I heard the Mother of All,
  Desperate on the torn bodies, on the forms covering the battlefields gazing,	  Desperate on the torn bodies, on the forms covering the battlefields gazing,	  Desperate on the torn bodies, on the forms covering the battlefields gazing,	  Desperate on the torn bodies, on the forms covering the battlefields gazing,
  (As the last gun ceased, but the scent of the powder-smoke linger'd,)	  (As the last gun ceased, but the scent of the powder-smoke linger'd,)	  (As the last gun ceased, but the scent of the powder-smoke linger'd,)	  (As the last gun ceased, but the scent of the powder-smoke linger'd,)
  As she call'd to her earth with mournful voice while she stalk'd,	  As she call'd to her earth with mournful voice while she stalk'd,	  As she call'd to her earth with mournful voice while she stalk'd,	  As she call'd to her earth with mournful voice while she stalk'd,
  Absorb them well O my earth, she cried, I charge you lose not my	  Absorb them well O my earth, she cried, I charge you lose not my	  Absorb them well O my earth, she cried, I charge you lose not my	  Absorb them well O my earth, she cried, I charge you lose not my
      sons, lose not an atom,	      sons, lose not an atom,	      sons, lose not an atom,	      sons, lose not an atom,
  And you streams absorb them well, taking their dear blood,	  And you streams absorb them well, taking their dear blood,	  And you streams absorb them well, taking their dear blood,	  And you streams absorb them well, taking their dear blood,
  And you local spots, and you airs that swim above lightly impalpable,	  And you local spots, and you airs that swim above lightly impalpable,	  And you local spots, and you airs that swim above lightly impalpable,	  And you local spots, and you airs that swim above lightly impalpable,
  And all you essences of soil and growth, and you my rivers' depths,	  And all you essences of soil and growth, and you my rivers' depths,	  And all you essences of soil and growth, and you my rivers' depths,	  And all you essences of soil and growth, and you my rivers' depths,
  And you mountain sides, and the woods where my dear children's	  And you mountain sides, and the woods where my dear children's	  And you mountain sides, and the woods where my dear children's	  And you mountain sides, and the woods where my dear children's
      blood trickling redden'd,	      blood trickling redden'd,	      blood trickling redden'd,	      blood trickling redden'd,
  And you trees down in your roots to bequeath to all future trees,	  And you trees down in your roots to bequeath to all future trees,	  And you trees down in your roots to bequeath to all future trees,	  And you trees down in your roots to bequeath to all future trees,
  My dead absorb or South or North--my young men's bodies absorb,	  My dead absorb or South or North--my young men's bodies absorb,	  My dead absorb or South or North--my young men's bodies absorb,	  My dead absorb or South or North--my young men's bodies absorb,
      and their precious precious blood,	      and their precious precious blood,	      and their precious precious blood,	      and their precious precious blood,
  Which holding in trust for me faithfully back again give me many a	  Which holding in trust for me faithfully back again give me many a	  Which holding in trust for me faithfully back again give me many a	  Which holding in trust for me faithfully back again give me many a
      year hence,	      year hence,	      year hence,	      year hence,
  In unseen essence and odor of surface and grass, centuries hence,	  In unseen essence and odor of surface and grass, centuries hence,	  In unseen essence and odor of surface and grass, centuries hence,	  In unseen essence and odor of surface and grass, centuries hence,
  In blowing airs from the fields back again give me my darlings, give	  In blowing airs from the fields back again give me my darlings, give	  In blowing airs from the fields back again give me my darlings, give	  In blowing airs from the fields back again give me my darlings, give
      my immortal heroes,	      my immortal heroes,	      my immortal heroes,	      my immortal heroes,
  Exhale me them centuries hence, breathe me their breath, let not an	  Exhale me them centuries hence, breathe me their breath, let not an	  Exhale me them centuries hence, breathe me their breath, let not an	  Exhale me them centuries hence, breathe me their breath, let not an
      atom be lost,	      atom be lost,	      atom be lost,	      atom be lost,
  O years and graves! O air and soil! O my dead, an aroma sweet!	  O years and graves! O air and soil! O my dead, an aroma sweet!	  O years and graves! O air and soil! O my dead, an aroma sweet!	  O years and graves! O air and soil! O my dead, an aroma sweet!
  Exhale them perennial sweet death, years, centuries hence.	  Exhale them perennial sweet death, years, centuries hence.	  Exhale them perennial sweet death, years, centuries hence.	  Exhale them perennial sweet death, years, centuries hence.
			
			
			
			
Camps of Green	Camps of Green	Camps of Green	Camps of Green
			
  Nor alone those camps of white, old comrades of the wars,	  Nor alone those camps of white, old comrades of the wars,	  Nor alone those camps of white, old comrades of the wars,	  Nor alone those camps of white, old comrades of the wars,
  When as order'd forward, after a long march,	  When as order'd forward, after a long march,	  When as order'd forward, after a long march,	  When as order'd forward, after a long march,
  Footsore and weary, soon as the light lessens we halt for the night,	  Footsore and weary, soon as the light lessens we halt for the night,	  Footsore and weary, soon as the light lessens we halt for the night,	  Footsore and weary, soon as the light lessens we halt for the night,
  Some of us so fatigued carrying the gun and knapsack, dropping	  Some of us so fatigued carrying the gun and knapsack, dropping	  Some of us so fatigued carrying the gun and knapsack, dropping	  Some of us so fatigued carrying the gun and knapsack, dropping
      asleep in our tracks,	      asleep in our tracks,	      asleep in our tracks,	      asleep in our tracks,
  Others pitching the little tents, and the fires lit up begin to sparkle,	  Others pitching the little tents, and the fires lit up begin to sparkle,	  Others pitching the little tents, and the fires lit up begin to sparkle,	  Others pitching the little tents, and the fires lit up begin to sparkle,
  Outposts of pickets posted surrounding alert through the dark,	  Outposts of pickets posted surrounding alert through the dark,	  Outposts of pickets posted surrounding alert through the dark,	  Outposts of pickets posted surrounding alert through the dark,
  And a word provided for countersign, careful for safety,	  And a word provided for countersign, careful for safety,	  And a word provided for countersign, careful for safety,	  And a word provided for countersign, careful for safety,
  Till to the call of the drummers at daybreak loudly beating the drums,	  Till to the call of the drummers at daybreak loudly beating the drums,	  Till to the call of the drummers at daybreak loudly beating the drums,	  Till to the call of the drummers at daybreak loudly beating the drums,
  We rise up refresh'd, the night and sleep pass'd over, and resume our	  We rise up refresh'd, the night and sleep pass'd over, and resume our	  We rise up refresh'd, the night and sleep pass'd over, and resume our	  We rise up refresh'd, the night and sleep pass'd over, and resume our
      journey,	      journey,	      journey,	      journey,
  Or proceed to battle.	  Or proceed to battle.	  Or proceed to battle.	  Or proceed to battle.
			
  Lo, the camps of the tents of green,	  Lo, the camps of the tents of green,	  Lo, the camps of the tents of green,	  Lo, the camps of the tents of green,
  Which the days of peace keep filling, and the days of war keep filling,	  Which the days of peace keep filling, and the days of war keep filling,	  Which the days of peace keep filling, and the days of war keep filling,	  Which the days of peace keep filling, and the days of war keep filling,
  With a mystic army, (is it too order'd forward? is it too only	  With a mystic army, (is it too order'd forward? is it too only	  With a mystic army, (is it too order'd forward? is it too only	  With a mystic army, (is it too order'd forward? is it too only
      halting awhile,	      halting awhile,	      halting awhile,	      halting awhile,
  Till night and sleep pass over?)	  Till night and sleep pass over?)	  Till night and sleep pass over?)	  Till night and sleep pass over?)
			
  Now in those camps of green, in their tents dotting the world,	  Now in those camps of green, in their tents dotting the world,	  Now in those camps of green, in their tents dotting the world,	  Now in those camps of green, in their tents dotting the world,
  In the parents, children, husbands, wives, in them, in the old and young,	  In the parents, children, husbands, wives, in them, in the old and young,	  In the parents, children, husbands, wives, in them, in the old and young,	  In the parents, children, husbands, wives, in them, in the old and young,
  Sleeping under the sunlight, sleeping under the moonlight, content	  Sleeping under the sunlight, sleeping under the moonlight, content	  Sleeping under the sunlight, sleeping under the moonlight, content	  Sleeping under the sunlight, sleeping under the moonlight, content
      and silent there at last,	      and silent there at last,	      and silent there at last,	      and silent there at last,
  Behold the mighty bivouac-field and waiting-camp of all,	  Behold the mighty bivouac-field and waiting-camp of all,	  Behold the mighty bivouac-field and waiting-camp of all,	  Behold the mighty bivouac-field and waiting-camp of all,
  Of the corps and generals all, and the President over the corps and	  Of the corps and generals all, and the President over the corps and	  Of the corps and generals all, and the President over the corps and	  Of the corps and generals all, and the President over the corps and
      generals all,	      generals all,	      generals all,	      generals all,
  And of each of us O soldiers, and of each and all in the ranks we fought,	  And of each of us O soldiers, and of each and all in the ranks we fought,	  And of each of us O soldiers, and of each and all in the ranks we fought,	  And of each of us O soldiers, and of each and all in the ranks we fought,
  (There without hatred we all, all meet.)	  (There without hatred we all, all meet.)	  (There without hatred we all, all meet.)	  (There without hatred we all, all meet.)
			
  For presently O soldiers, we too camp in our place in the	  For presently O soldiers, we too camp in our place in the	  For presently O soldiers, we too camp in our place in the	  For presently O soldiers, we too camp in our place in the
      bivouac-camps of green,	      bivouac-camps of green,	      bivouac-camps of green,	      bivouac-camps of green,
  But we need not provide for outposts, nor word for the countersign,	  But we need not provide for outposts, nor word for the countersign,	  But we need not provide for outposts, nor word for the countersign,	  But we need not provide for outposts, nor word for the countersign,
  Nor drummer to beat the morning drum.	  Nor drummer to beat the morning drum.	  Nor drummer to beat the morning drum.	  Nor drummer to beat the morning drum.
			
			
			
			
The Sobbing of the Bells [Midnight, Sept. 19-20, 1881]	The Sobbing of the Bells [Midnight, Sept. 19-20, 1881]	The Sobbing of the Bells [Midnight, Sept. 19-20, 1881]	The Sobbing of the Bells [Midnight, Sept. 19-20, 1881]
			
  The sobbing of the bells, the sudden death-news everywhere,	  The sobbing of the bells, the sudden death-news everywhere,	  The sobbing of the bells, the sudden death-news everywhere,	  The sobbing of the bells, the sudden death-news everywhere,
  The slumberers rouse, the rapport of the People,	  The slumberers rouse, the rapport of the People,	  The slumberers rouse, the rapport of the People,	  The slumberers rouse, the rapport of the People,
  (Full well they know that message in the darkness,	  (Full well they know that message in the darkness,	  (Full well they know that message in the darkness,	  (Full well they know that message in the darkness,
  Full well return, respond within their breasts, their brains, the	  Full well return, respond within their breasts, their brains, the	  Full well return, respond within their breasts, their brains, the	  Full well return, respond within their breasts, their brains, the
      sad reverberations,)	      sad reverberations,)	      sad reverberations,)	      sad reverberations,)
  The passionate toll and clang--city to city, joining, sounding, passing,	  The passionate toll and clang--city to city, joining, sounding, passing,	  The passionate toll and clang--city to city, joining, sounding, passing,	  The passionate toll and clang--city to city, joining, sounding, passing,
  Those heart-beats of a Nation in the night.	  Those heart-beats of a Nation in the night.	  Those heart-beats of a Nation in the night.	  Those heart-beats of a Nation in the night.
			
			
			
			
As They Draw to a Close	As They Draw to a Close	As They Draw to a Close	As They Draw to a Close
			
  As they draw to a close,	  As they draw to a close,	  As they draw to a close,	  As they draw to a close,
  Of what underlies the precedent songs--of my aims in them,	  Of what underlies the precedent songs--of my aims in them,	  Of what underlies the precedent songs--of my aims in them,	  Of what underlies the precedent songs--of my aims in them,
  Of the seed I have sought to plant in them,	  Of the seed I have sought to plant in them,	  Of the seed I have sought to plant in them,	  Of the seed I have sought to plant in them,
  Of joy, sweet joy, through many a year, in them,	  Of joy, sweet joy, through many a year, in them,	  Of joy, sweet joy, through many a year, in them,	  Of joy, sweet joy, through many a year, in them,
  (For them, for them have I lived, in them my work is done,)	  (For them, for them have I lived, in them my work is done,)	  (For them, for them have I lived, in them my work is done,)	  (For them, for them have I lived, in them my work is done,)
  Of many an aspiration fond, of many a dream and plan;	  Of many an aspiration fond, of many a dream and plan;	  Of many an aspiration fond, of many a dream and plan;	  Of many an aspiration fond, of many a dream and plan;
  Through Space and Time fused in a chant, and the flowing eternal identity,	  Through Space and Time fused in a chant, and the flowing eternal identity,	  Through Space and Time fused in a chant, and the flowing eternal identity,	  Through Space and Time fused in a chant, and the flowing eternal identity,
  To Nature encompassing these, encompassing God--to the joyous,	  To Nature encompassing these, encompassing God--to the joyous,	  To Nature encompassing these, encompassing God--to the joyous,	  To Nature encompassing these, encompassing God--to the joyous,
      electric all,	      electric all,	      electric all,	      electric all,
  To the sense of Death, and accepting exulting in Death in its turn	  To the sense of Death, and accepting exulting in Death in its turn	  To the sense of Death, and accepting exulting in Death in its turn	  To the sense of Death, and accepting exulting in Death in its turn
      the same as life,	      the same as life,	      the same as life,	      the same as life,
  The entrance of man to sing;	  The entrance of man to sing;	  The entrance of man to sing;	  The entrance of man to sing;
  To compact you, ye parted, diverse lives,	  To compact you, ye parted, diverse lives,	  To compact you, ye parted, diverse lives,	  To compact you, ye parted, diverse lives,
  To put rapport the mountains and rocks and streams,	  To put rapport the mountains and rocks and streams,	  To put rapport the mountains and rocks and streams,	  To put rapport the mountains and rocks and streams,
  And the winds of the north, and the forests of oak and pine,	  And the winds of the north, and the forests of oak and pine,	  And the winds of the north, and the forests of oak and pine,	  And the winds of the north, and the forests of oak and pine,
  With you O soul.	  With you O soul.	  With you O soul.	  With you O soul.
			
			
			
			
Joy, Shipmate, Joy!	Joy, Shipmate, Joy!	Joy, Shipmate, Joy!	Joy, Shipmate, Joy!
			
  Joy, shipmate, Joy!	  Joy, shipmate, Joy!	  Joy, shipmate, Joy!	  Joy, shipmate, Joy!
  (Pleas'd to my soul at death I cry,)	  (Pleas'd to my soul at death I cry,)	  (Pleas'd to my soul at death I cry,)	  (Pleas'd to my soul at death I cry,)
  Our life is closed, our life begins,	  Our life is closed, our life begins,	  Our life is closed, our life begins,	  Our life is closed, our life begins,
  The long, long anchorage we leave,	  The long, long anchorage we leave,	  The long, long anchorage we leave,	  The long, long anchorage we leave,
  The ship is clear at last, she leaps!	  The ship is clear at last, she leaps!	  The ship is clear at last, she leaps!	  The ship is clear at last, she leaps!
  She swiftly courses from the shore,	  She swiftly courses from the shore,	  She swiftly courses from the shore,	  She swiftly courses from the shore,
  Joy, shipmate, joy.	  Joy, shipmate, joy.	  Joy, shipmate, joy.	  Joy, shipmate, joy.
			
			
			
			
The Untold Want	The Untold Want	The Untold Want	The Untold Want
			
  The untold want by life and land ne'er granted,	  The untold want by life and land ne'er granted,	  The untold want by life and land ne'er granted,	  The untold want by life and land ne'er granted,
  Now voyager sail thou forth to seek and find.	  Now voyager sail thou forth to seek and find.	  Now voyager sail thou forth to seek and find.	  Now voyager sail thou forth to seek and find.
			
			
			
			
Portals	Portals	Portals	Portals
			
  What are those of the known but to ascend and enter the Unknown?	  What are those of the known but to ascend and enter the Unknown?	  What are those of the known but to ascend and enter the Unknown?	  What are those of the known but to ascend and enter the Unknown?
  And what are those of life but for Death?	  And what are those of life but for Death?	  And what are those of life but for Death?	  And what are those of life but for Death?
			
			
			
			
These Carols	These Carols	These Carols	These Carols
			
  These carols sung to cheer my passage through the world I see,	  These carols sung to cheer my passage through the world I see,	  These carols sung to cheer my passage through the world I see,	  These carols sung to cheer my passage through the world I see,
  For completion I dedicate to the Invisible World.	  For completion I dedicate to the Invisible World.	  For completion I dedicate to the Invisible World.	  For completion I dedicate to the Invisible World.
			
			
			
			
Now Finale to the Shore	Now Finale to the Shore	Now Finale to the Shore	Now Finale to the Shore
			
  Now finale to the shore,	  Now finale to the shore,	  Now finale to the shore,	  Now finale to the shore,
  Now land and life finale and farewell,	  Now land and life finale and farewell,	  Now land and life finale and farewell,	  Now land and life finale and farewell,
  Now Voyager depart, (much, much for thee is yet in store,)	  Now Voyager depart, (much, much for thee is yet in store,)	  Now Voyager depart, (much, much for thee is yet in store,)	  Now Voyager depart, (much, much for thee is yet in store,)
  Often enough hast thou adventur'd o'er the seas,	  Often enough hast thou adventur'd o'er the seas,	  Often enough hast thou adventur'd o'er the seas,	  Often enough hast thou adventur'd o'er the seas,
  Cautiously cruising, studying the charts,	  Cautiously cruising, studying the charts,	  Cautiously cruising, studying the charts,	  Cautiously cruising, studying the charts,
  Duly again to port and hawser's tie returning;	  Duly again to port and hawser's tie returning;	  Duly again to port and hawser's tie returning;	  Duly again to port and hawser's tie returning;
  But now obey thy cherish'd secret wish,	  But now obey thy cherish'd secret wish,	  But now obey thy cherish'd secret wish,	  But now obey thy cherish'd secret wish,
  Embrace thy friends, leave all in order,	  Embrace thy friends, leave all in order,	  Embrace thy friends, leave all in order,	  Embrace thy friends, leave all in order,
  To port and hawser's tie no more returning,	  To port and hawser's tie no more returning,	  To port and hawser's tie no more returning,	  To port and hawser's tie no more returning,
  Depart upon thy endless cruise old Sailor.	  Depart upon thy endless cruise old Sailor.	  Depart upon thy endless cruise old Sailor.	  Depart upon thy endless cruise old Sailor.
			
			
			
			
So Long!	So Long!	So Long!	So Long!
			
  To conclude, I announce what comes after me.	  To conclude, I announce what comes after me.	  To conclude, I announce what comes after me.	  To conclude, I announce what comes after me.
			
  I remember I said before my leaves sprang at all,	  I remember I said before my leaves sprang at all,	  I remember I said before my leaves sprang at all,	  I remember I said before my leaves sprang at all,
  I would raise my voice jocund and strong with reference to consummations.	  I would raise my voice jocund and strong with reference to consummations.	  I would raise my voice jocund and strong with reference to consummations.	  I would raise my voice jocund and strong with reference to consummations.
			
  When America does what was promis'd,	  When America does what was promis'd,	  When America does what was promis'd,	  When America does what was promis'd,
  When through these States walk a hundred millions of superb persons,	  When through these States walk a hundred millions of superb persons,	  When through these States walk a hundred millions of superb persons,	  When through these States walk a hundred millions of superb persons,
  When the rest part away for superb persons and contribute to them,	  When the rest part away for superb persons and contribute to them,	  When the rest part away for superb persons and contribute to them,	  When the rest part away for superb persons and contribute to them,
  When breeds of the most perfect mothers denote America,	  When breeds of the most perfect mothers denote America,	  When breeds of the most perfect mothers denote America,	  When breeds of the most perfect mothers denote America,
  Then to me and mine our due fruition.	  Then to me and mine our due fruition.	  Then to me and mine our due fruition.	  Then to me and mine our due fruition.
			
  I have press'd through in my own right,	  I have press'd through in my own right,	  I have press'd through in my own right,	  I have press'd through in my own right,
  I have sung the body and the soul, war and peace have I sung, and	  I have sung the body and the soul, war and peace have I sung, and	  I have sung the body and the soul, war and peace have I sung, and	  I have sung the body and the soul, war and peace have I sung, and
      the songs of life and death,	      the songs of life and death,	      the songs of life and death,	      the songs of life and death,
  And the songs of birth, and shown that there are many births.	  And the songs of birth, and shown that there are many births.	  And the songs of birth, and shown that there are many births.	  And the songs of birth, and shown that there are many births.
			
  I have offer'd my style to every one, I have journey'd with confident step;	  I have offer'd my style to every one, I have journey'd with confident step;	  I have offer'd my style to every one, I have journey'd with confident step;	  I have offer'd my style to every one, I have journey'd with confident step;
  While my pleasure is yet at the full I whisper So long!	  While my pleasure is yet at the full I whisper So long!	  While my pleasure is yet at the full I whisper So long!	  While my pleasure is yet at the full I whisper So long!
  And take the young woman's hand and the young man's hand for the last time.	  And take the young woman's hand and the young man's hand for the last time.	  And take the young woman's hand and the young man's hand for the last time.	  And take the young woman's hand and the young man's hand for the last time.
			
  I announce natural persons to arise,	  I announce natural persons to arise,	  I announce natural persons to arise,	  I announce natural persons to arise,
  I announce justice triumphant,	  I announce justice triumphant,	  I announce justice triumphant,	  I announce justice triumphant,
  I announce uncompromising liberty and equality,	  I announce uncompromising liberty and equality,	  I announce uncompromising liberty and equality,	  I announce uncompromising liberty and equality,
  I announce the justification of candor and the justification of pride.	  I announce the justification of candor and the justification of pride.	  I announce the justification of candor and the justification of pride.	  I announce the justification of candor and the justification of pride.
			
  I announce that the identity of these States is a single identity only,	  I announce that the identity of these States is a single identity only,	  I announce that the identity of these States is a single identity only,	  I announce that the identity of these States is a single identity only,
  I announce the Union more and more compact, indissoluble,	  I announce the Union more and more compact, indissoluble,	  I announce the Union more and more compact, indissoluble,	  I announce the Union more and more compact, indissoluble,
  I announce splendors and majesties to make all the previous politics	  I announce splendors and majesties to make all the previous politics	  I announce splendors and majesties to make all the previous politics	  I announce splendors and majesties to make all the previous politics
      of the earth insignificant.	      of the earth insignificant.	      of the earth insignificant.	      of the earth insignificant.
			
  I announce adhesiveness, I say it shall be limitless, unloosen'd,	  I announce adhesiveness, I say it shall be limitless, unloosen'd,	  I announce adhesiveness, I say it shall be limitless, unloosen'd,	  I announce adhesiveness, I say it shall be limitless, unloosen'd,
  I say you shall yet find the friend you were looking for.	  I say you shall yet find the friend you were looking for.	  I say you shall yet find the friend you were looking for.	  I say you shall yet find the friend you were looking for.
			
  I announce a man or woman coming, perhaps you are the one, (So long!)	  I announce a man or woman coming, perhaps you are the one, (So long!)	  I announce a man or woman coming, perhaps you are the one, (So long!)	  I announce a man or woman coming, perhaps you are the one, (So long!)
  I announce the great individual, fluid as Nature, chaste,	  I announce the great individual, fluid as Nature, chaste,	  I announce the great individual, fluid as Nature, chaste,	  I announce the great individual, fluid as Nature, chaste,
      affectionate, compassionate, fully arm'd.	      affectionate, compassionate, fully arm'd.	      affectionate, compassionate, fully arm'd.	      affectionate, compassionate, fully arm'd.
			
  I announce a life that shall be copious, vehement, spiritual, bold,	  I announce a life that shall be copious, vehement, spiritual, bold,	  I announce a life that shall be copious, vehement, spiritual, bold,	  I announce a life that shall be copious, vehement, spiritual, bold,
  I announce an end that shall lightly and joyfully meet its translation.	  I announce an end that shall lightly and joyfully meet its translation.	  I announce an end that shall lightly and joyfully meet its translation.	  I announce an end that shall lightly and joyfully meet its translation.
			
  I announce myriads of youths, beautiful, gigantic, sweet-blooded,	  I announce myriads of youths, beautiful, gigantic, sweet-blooded,	  I announce myriads of youths, beautiful, gigantic, sweet-blooded,	  I announce myriads of youths, beautiful, gigantic, sweet-blooded,
  I announce a race of splendid and savage old men.	  I announce a race of splendid and savage old men.	  I announce a race of splendid and savage old men.	  I announce a race of splendid and savage old men.
			
  O thicker and faster--(So long!)	  O thicker and faster--(So long!)	  O thicker and faster--(So long!)	  O thicker and faster--(So long!)
  O crowding too close upon me,	  O crowding too close upon me,	  O crowding too close upon me,	  O crowding too close upon me,
  I foresee too much, it means more than I thought,	  I foresee too much, it means more than I thought,	  I foresee too much, it means more than I thought,	  I foresee too much, it means more than I thought,
  It appears to me I am dying.	  It appears to me I am dying.	  It appears to me I am dying.	  It appears to me I am dying.
			
  Hasten throat and sound your last,	  Hasten throat and sound your last,	  Hasten throat and sound your last,	  Hasten throat and sound your last,
  Salute me--salute the days once more. Peal the old cry once more.	  Salute me--salute the days once more. Peal the old cry once more.	  Salute me--salute the days once more. Peal the old cry once more.	  Salute me--salute the days once more. Peal the old cry once more.
			
  Screaming electric, the atmosphere using,	  Screaming electric, the atmosphere using,	  Screaming electric, the atmosphere using,	  Screaming electric, the atmosphere using,
  At random glancing, each as I notice absorbing,	  At random glancing, each as I notice absorbing,	  At random glancing, each as I notice absorbing,	  At random glancing, each as I notice absorbing,
  Swiftly on, but a little while alighting,	  Swiftly on, but a little while alighting,	  Swiftly on, but a little while alighting,	  Swiftly on, but a little while alighting,
  Curious envelop'd messages delivering,	  Curious envelop'd messages delivering,	  Curious envelop'd messages delivering,	  Curious envelop'd messages delivering,
  Sparkles hot, seed ethereal down in the dirt dropping,	  Sparkles hot, seed ethereal down in the dirt dropping,	  Sparkles hot, seed ethereal down in the dirt dropping,	  Sparkles hot, seed ethereal down in the dirt dropping,
  Myself unknowing, my commission obeying, to question it never daring,	  Myself unknowing, my commission obeying, to question it never daring,	  Myself unknowing, my commission obeying, to question it never daring,	  Myself unknowing, my commission obeying, to question it never daring,
  To ages and ages yet the growth of the seed leaving,	  To ages and ages yet the growth of the seed leaving,	  To ages and ages yet the growth of the seed leaving,	  To ages and ages yet the growth of the seed leaving,
  To troops out of the war arising, they the tasks I have set	  To troops out of the war arising, they the tasks I have set	  To troops out of the war arising, they the tasks I have set	  To troops out of the war arising, they the tasks I have set
  promulging,	  promulging,	  promulging,	  promulging,
  To women certain whispers of myself bequeathing, their affection	  To women certain whispers of myself bequeathing, their affection	  To women certain whispers of myself bequeathing, their affection	  To women certain whispers of myself bequeathing, their affection
      me more clearly explaining,	      me more clearly explaining,	      me more clearly explaining,	      me more clearly explaining,
  To young men my problems offering--no dallier I--I the muscle of	  To young men my problems offering--no dallier I--I the muscle of	  To young men my problems offering--no dallier I--I the muscle of	  To young men my problems offering--no dallier I--I the muscle of
      their brains trying,	      their brains trying,	      their brains trying,	      their brains trying,
  So I pass, a little time vocal, visible, contrary,	  So I pass, a little time vocal, visible, contrary,	  So I pass, a little time vocal, visible, contrary,	  So I pass, a little time vocal, visible, contrary,
  Afterward a melodious echo, passionately bent for, (death making	  Afterward a melodious echo, passionately bent for, (death making	  Afterward a melodious echo, passionately bent for, (death making	  Afterward a melodious echo, passionately bent for, (death making
      me really undying,)	      me really undying,)	      me really undying,)	      me really undying,)
  The best of me then when no longer visible, for toward that I have	  The best of me then when no longer visible, for toward that I have	  The best of me then when no longer visible, for toward that I have	  The best of me then when no longer visible, for toward that I have
      been incessantly preparing.	      been incessantly preparing.	      been incessantly preparing.	      been incessantly preparing.
			
  What is there more, that I lag and pause and crouch extended with	  What is there more, that I lag and pause and crouch extended with	  What is there more, that I lag and pause and crouch extended with	  What is there more, that I lag and pause and crouch extended with
      unshut mouth?	      unshut mouth?	      unshut mouth?	      unshut mouth?
  Is there a single final farewell?	  Is there a single final farewell?	  Is there a single final farewell?	  Is there a single final farewell?
  My songs cease, I abandon them,	  My songs cease, I abandon them,	  My songs cease, I abandon them,	  My songs cease, I abandon them,
  From behind the screen where I hid I advance personally solely to you.	  From behind the screen where I hid I advance personally solely to you.	  From behind the screen where I hid I advance personally solely to you.	  From behind the screen where I hid I advance personally solely to you.
			
  Camerado, this is no book,	  Camerado, this is no book,	  Camerado, this is no book,	  Camerado, this is no book,
  Who touches this touches a man,	  Who touches this touches a man,	  Who touches this touches a man,	  Who touches this touches a man,
  (Is it night? are we here together alone?)	  (Is it night? are we here together alone?)	  (Is it night? are we here together alone?)	  (Is it night? are we here together alone?)
  It is I you hold and who holds you,	  It is I you hold and who holds you,	  It is I you hold and who holds you,	  It is I you hold and who holds you,
  I spring from the pages into your arms--decease calls me forth.	  I spring from the pages into your arms--decease calls me forth.	  I spring from the pages into your arms--decease calls me forth.	  I spring from the pages into your arms--decease calls me forth.
			
  O how your fingers drowse me,	  O how your fingers drowse me,	  O how your fingers drowse me,	  O how your fingers drowse me,
  Your breath falls around me like dew, your pulse lulls the tympans	  Your breath falls around me like dew, your pulse lulls the tympans	  Your breath falls around me like dew, your pulse lulls the tympans	  Your breath falls around me like dew, your pulse lulls the tympans
      of my ears,	      of my ears,	      of my ears,	      of my ears,
  I feel immerged from head to foot,	  I feel immerged from head to foot,	  I feel immerged from head to foot,	  I feel immerged from head to foot,
  Delicious, enough.	  Delicious, enough.	  Delicious, enough.	  Delicious, enough.
			
  Enough O deed impromptu and secret,	  Enough O deed impromptu and secret,	  Enough O deed impromptu and secret,	  Enough O deed impromptu and secret,
  Enough O gliding present--enough O summ'd-up past.	  Enough O gliding present--enough O summ'd-up past.	  Enough O gliding present--enough O summ'd-up past.	  Enough O gliding present--enough O summ'd-up past.
			
  Dear friend whoever you are take this kiss,	  Dear friend whoever you are take this kiss,	  Dear friend whoever you are take this kiss,	  Dear friend whoever you are take this kiss,
  I give it especially to you, do not forget me,	  I give it especially to you, do not forget me,	  I give it especially to you, do not forget me,	  I give it especially to you, do not forget me,
  I feel like one who has done work for the day to retire awhile,	  I feel like one who has done work for the day to retire awhile,	  I feel like one who has done work for the day to retire awhile,	  I feel like one who has done work for the day to retire awhile,
  I receive now again of my many translations, from my avataras	  I receive now again of my many translations, from my avataras	  I receive now again of my many translations, from my avataras	  I receive now again of my many translations, from my avataras
      ascending, while others doubtless await me,	      ascending, while others doubtless await me,	      ascending, while others doubtless await me,	      ascending, while others doubtless await me,
  An unknown sphere more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts	  An unknown sphere more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts	  An unknown sphere more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts	  An unknown sphere more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts
      awakening rays about me, So long!	      awakening rays about me, So long!	      awakening rays about me, So long!	      awakening rays about me, So long!
  Remember my words, I may again return,	  Remember my words, I may again return,	  Remember my words, I may again return,	  Remember my words, I may again return,
  I love you, I depart from materials,	  I love you, I depart from materials,	  I love you, I depart from materials,	  I love you, I depart from materials,
  I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead.	  I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead.	  I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead.	  I am as one disembodied, triumphant, dead.
			
			
			
			
BOOK XXXIV.  SANDS AT SEVENTY	BOOK XXXIV.  SANDS AT SEVENTY	BOOK XXXIV.  SANDS AT SEVENTY	BOOK XXXIV.  SANDS AT SEVENTY
			
			
Mannahatta	Mannahatta	Mannahatta	Mannahatta
			
  My city's fit and noble name resumed,	  My city's fit and noble name resumed,	  My city's fit and noble name resumed,	  My city's fit and noble name resumed,
  Choice aboriginal name, with marvellous beauty, meaning,	  Choice aboriginal name, with marvellous beauty, meaning,	  Choice aboriginal name, with marvellous beauty, meaning,	  Choice aboriginal name, with marvellous beauty, meaning,
  A rocky founded island--shores where ever gayly dash the coming,	  A rocky founded island--shores where ever gayly dash the coming,	  A rocky founded island--shores where ever gayly dash the coming,	  A rocky founded island--shores where ever gayly dash the coming,
      going, hurrying sea waves.	      going, hurrying sea waves.	      going, hurrying sea waves.	      going, hurrying sea waves.
			
			
			
			
Paumanok	Paumanok	Paumanok	Paumanok
			
  Sea-beauty! stretch'd and basking!	  Sea-beauty! stretch'd and basking!	  Sea-beauty! stretch'd and basking!	  Sea-beauty! stretch'd and basking!
  One side thy inland ocean laving, broad, with copious commerce,	  One side thy inland ocean laving, broad, with copious commerce,	  One side thy inland ocean laving, broad, with copious commerce,	  One side thy inland ocean laving, broad, with copious commerce,
      steamers, sails,	      steamers, sails,	      steamers, sails,	      steamers, sails,
  And one the Atlantic's wind caressing, fierce or gentle--mighty hulls	  And one the Atlantic's wind caressing, fierce or gentle--mighty hulls	  And one the Atlantic's wind caressing, fierce or gentle--mighty hulls	  And one the Atlantic's wind caressing, fierce or gentle--mighty hulls
      dark-gliding in the distance.	      dark-gliding in the distance.	      dark-gliding in the distance.	      dark-gliding in the distance.
  Isle of sweet brooks of drinking-water--healthy air and soil!	  Isle of sweet brooks of drinking-water--healthy air and soil!	  Isle of sweet brooks of drinking-water--healthy air and soil!	  Isle of sweet brooks of drinking-water--healthy air and soil!
  Isle of the salty shore and breeze and brine!	  Isle of the salty shore and breeze and brine!	  Isle of the salty shore and breeze and brine!	  Isle of the salty shore and breeze and brine!
			
			
			
			
From Montauk Point	From Montauk Point	From Montauk Point	From Montauk Point
			
  I stand as on some mighty eagle's beak,	  I stand as on some mighty eagle's beak,	  I stand as on some mighty eagle's beak,	  I stand as on some mighty eagle's beak,
  Eastward the sea absorbing, viewing, (nothing but sea and sky,)	  Eastward the sea absorbing, viewing, (nothing but sea and sky,)	  Eastward the sea absorbing, viewing, (nothing but sea and sky,)	  Eastward the sea absorbing, viewing, (nothing but sea and sky,)
  The tossing waves, the foam, the ships in the distance,	  The tossing waves, the foam, the ships in the distance,	  The tossing waves, the foam, the ships in the distance,	  The tossing waves, the foam, the ships in the distance,
  The wild unrest, the snowy, curling caps--that inbound urge and urge	  The wild unrest, the snowy, curling caps--that inbound urge and urge	  The wild unrest, the snowy, curling caps--that inbound urge and urge	  The wild unrest, the snowy, curling caps--that inbound urge and urge
      of waves,	      of waves,	      of waves,	      of waves,
  Seeking the shores forever.	  Seeking the shores forever.	  Seeking the shores forever.	  Seeking the shores forever.
			
			
			
			
To Those Who've Fail'd	To Those Who've Fail'd	To Those Who've Fail'd	To Those Who've Fail'd
			
  To those who've fail'd, in aspiration vast,	  To those who've fail'd, in aspiration vast,	  To those who've fail'd, in aspiration vast,	  To those who've fail'd, in aspiration vast,
  To unnam'd soldiers fallen in front on the lead,	  To unnam'd soldiers fallen in front on the lead,	  To unnam'd soldiers fallen in front on the lead,	  To unnam'd soldiers fallen in front on the lead,
  To calm, devoted engineers--to over-ardent travelers--to pilots on	  To calm, devoted engineers--to over-ardent travelers--to pilots on	  To calm, devoted engineers--to over-ardent travelers--to pilots on	  To calm, devoted engineers--to over-ardent travelers--to pilots on
      their ships,	      their ships,	      their ships,	      their ships,
  To many a lofty song and picture without recognition--I'd rear	  To many a lofty song and picture without recognition--I'd rear	  To many a lofty song and picture without recognition--I'd rear	  To many a lofty song and picture without recognition--I'd rear
      laurel-cover'd monument,	      laurel-cover'd monument,	      laurel-cover'd monument,	      laurel-cover'd monument,
  High, high above the rest--To all cut off before their time,	  High, high above the rest--To all cut off before their time,	  High, high above the rest--To all cut off before their time,	  High, high above the rest--To all cut off before their time,
  Possess'd by some strange spirit of fire,	  Possess'd by some strange spirit of fire,	  Possess'd by some strange spirit of fire,	  Possess'd by some strange spirit of fire,
  Quench'd by an early death.	  Quench'd by an early death.	  Quench'd by an early death.	  Quench'd by an early death.
			
			
			
			
A Carol Closing Sixty-Nine	A Carol Closing Sixty-Nine	A Carol Closing Sixty-Nine	A Carol Closing Sixty-Nine
			
  A carol closing sixty-nine--a resume--a repetition,	  A carol closing sixty-nine--a resume--a repetition,	  A carol closing sixty-nine--a resume--a repetition,	  A carol closing sixty-nine--a resume--a repetition,
  My lines in joy and hope continuing on the same,	  My lines in joy and hope continuing on the same,	  My lines in joy and hope continuing on the same,	  My lines in joy and hope continuing on the same,
  Of ye, O God, Life, Nature, Freedom, Poetry;	  Of ye, O God, Life, Nature, Freedom, Poetry;	  Of ye, O God, Life, Nature, Freedom, Poetry;	  Of ye, O God, Life, Nature, Freedom, Poetry;
  Of you, my Land--your rivers, prairies, States--you, mottled Flag I love,	  Of you, my Land--your rivers, prairies, States--you, mottled Flag I love,	  Of you, my Land--your rivers, prairies, States--you, mottled Flag I love,	  Of you, my Land--your rivers, prairies, States--you, mottled Flag I love,
  Your aggregate retain'd entire--Of north, south, east and west, your	  Your aggregate retain'd entire--Of north, south, east and west, your	  Your aggregate retain'd entire--Of north, south, east and west, your	  Your aggregate retain'd entire--Of north, south, east and west, your
      items all;	      items all;	      items all;	      items all;
  Of me myself--the jocund heart yet beating in my breast,	  Of me myself--the jocund heart yet beating in my breast,	  Of me myself--the jocund heart yet beating in my breast,	  Of me myself--the jocund heart yet beating in my breast,
  The body wreck'd, old, poor and paralyzed--the strange inertia	  The body wreck'd, old, poor and paralyzed--the strange inertia	  The body wreck'd, old, poor and paralyzed--the strange inertia	  The body wreck'd, old, poor and paralyzed--the strange inertia
      falling pall-like round me,	      falling pall-like round me,	      falling pall-like round me,	      falling pall-like round me,
  The burning fires down in my sluggish blood not yet extinct,	  The burning fires down in my sluggish blood not yet extinct,	  The burning fires down in my sluggish blood not yet extinct,	  The burning fires down in my sluggish blood not yet extinct,
  The undiminish'd faith--the groups of loving friends.	  The undiminish'd faith--the groups of loving friends.	  The undiminish'd faith--the groups of loving friends.	  The undiminish'd faith--the groups of loving friends.
			
			
			
			
The Bravest Soldiers	The Bravest Soldiers	The Bravest Soldiers	The Bravest Soldiers
			
  Brave, brave were the soldiers (high named to-day) who lived through	  Brave, brave were the soldiers (high named to-day) who lived through	  Brave, brave were the soldiers (high named to-day) who lived through	  Brave, brave were the soldiers (high named to-day) who lived through
      the fight;	      the fight;	      the fight;	      the fight;
  But the bravest press'd to the front and fell, unnamed, unknown.	  But the bravest press'd to the front and fell, unnamed, unknown.	  But the bravest press'd to the front and fell, unnamed, unknown.	  But the bravest press'd to the front and fell, unnamed, unknown.
			
			
			
			
A Font of Type	A Font of Type	A Font of Type	A Font of Type
			
  This latent mine--these unlaunch'd voices--passionate powers,	  This latent mine--these unlaunch'd voices--passionate powers,	  This latent mine--these unlaunch'd voices--passionate powers,	  This latent mine--these unlaunch'd voices--passionate powers,
  Wrath, argument, or praise, or comic leer, or prayer devout,	  Wrath, argument, or praise, or comic leer, or prayer devout,	  Wrath, argument, or praise, or comic leer, or prayer devout,	  Wrath, argument, or praise, or comic leer, or prayer devout,
  (Not nonpareil, brevier, bourgeois, long primer merely,)	  (Not nonpareil, brevier, bourgeois, long primer merely,)	  (Not nonpareil, brevier, bourgeois, long primer merely,)	  (Not nonpareil, brevier, bourgeois, long primer merely,)
  These ocean waves arousable to fury and to death,	  These ocean waves arousable to fury and to death,	  These ocean waves arousable to fury and to death,	  These ocean waves arousable to fury and to death,
  Or sooth'd to ease and sheeny sun and sleep,	  Or sooth'd to ease and sheeny sun and sleep,	  Or sooth'd to ease and sheeny sun and sleep,	  Or sooth'd to ease and sheeny sun and sleep,
  Within the pallid slivers slumbering.	  Within the pallid slivers slumbering.	  Within the pallid slivers slumbering.	  Within the pallid slivers slumbering.
			
			
			
			
As I Sit Writing Here	As I Sit Writing Here	As I Sit Writing Here	As I Sit Writing Here
			
  As I sit writing here, sick and grown old,	  As I sit writing here, sick and grown old,	  As I sit writing here, sick and grown old,	  As I sit writing here, sick and grown old,
  Not my least burden is that dulness of the years, querilities,	  Not my least burden is that dulness of the years, querilities,	  Not my least burden is that dulness of the years, querilities,	  Not my least burden is that dulness of the years, querilities,
  Ungracious glooms, aches, lethargy, constipation, whimpering ennui,	  Ungracious glooms, aches, lethargy, constipation, whimpering ennui,	  Ungracious glooms, aches, lethargy, constipation, whimpering ennui,	  Ungracious glooms, aches, lethargy, constipation, whimpering ennui,
  May filter in my dally songs.	  May filter in my dally songs.	  May filter in my dally songs.	  May filter in my dally songs.
			
			
			
			
My Canary Bird	My Canary Bird	My Canary Bird	My Canary Bird
			
  Did we count great, O soul, to penetrate the themes of mighty books,	  Did we count great, O soul, to penetrate the themes of mighty books,	  Did we count great, O soul, to penetrate the themes of mighty books,	  Did we count great, O soul, to penetrate the themes of mighty books,
  Absorbing deep and full from thoughts, plays, speculations?	  Absorbing deep and full from thoughts, plays, speculations?	  Absorbing deep and full from thoughts, plays, speculations?	  Absorbing deep and full from thoughts, plays, speculations?
  But now from thee to me, caged bird, to feel thy joyous warble,	  But now from thee to me, caged bird, to feel thy joyous warble,	  But now from thee to me, caged bird, to feel thy joyous warble,	  But now from thee to me, caged bird, to feel thy joyous warble,
  Filling the air, the lonesome room, the long forenoon,	  Filling the air, the lonesome room, the long forenoon,	  Filling the air, the lonesome room, the long forenoon,	  Filling the air, the lonesome room, the long forenoon,
  Is it not just as great, O soul?	  Is it not just as great, O soul?	  Is it not just as great, O soul?	  Is it not just as great, O soul?
			
			
			
			
Queries to My Seventieth Year	Queries to My Seventieth Year	Queries to My Seventieth Year	Queries to My Seventieth Year
			
  Approaching, nearing, curious,	  Approaching, nearing, curious,	  Approaching, nearing, curious,	  Approaching, nearing, curious,
  Thou dim, uncertain spectre--bringest thou life or death?	  Thou dim, uncertain spectre--bringest thou life or death?	  Thou dim, uncertain spectre--bringest thou life or death?	  Thou dim, uncertain spectre--bringest thou life or death?
  Strength, weakness, blindness, more paralysis and heavier?	  Strength, weakness, blindness, more paralysis and heavier?	  Strength, weakness, blindness, more paralysis and heavier?	  Strength, weakness, blindness, more paralysis and heavier?
  Or placid skies and sun? Wilt stir the waters yet?	  Or placid skies and sun? Wilt stir the waters yet?	  Or placid skies and sun? Wilt stir the waters yet?	  Or placid skies and sun? Wilt stir the waters yet?
  Or haply cut me short for good? Or leave me here as now,	  Or haply cut me short for good? Or leave me here as now,	  Or haply cut me short for good? Or leave me here as now,	  Or haply cut me short for good? Or leave me here as now,
  Dull, parrot-like and old, with crack'd voice harping, screeching?	  Dull, parrot-like and old, with crack'd voice harping, screeching?	  Dull, parrot-like and old, with crack'd voice harping, screeching?	  Dull, parrot-like and old, with crack'd voice harping, screeching?
			
			
			
			
The Wallabout Martyrs	The Wallabout Martyrs	The Wallabout Martyrs	The Wallabout Martyrs
			
  Greater than memory of Achilles or Ulysses,	  Greater than memory of Achilles or Ulysses,	  Greater than memory of Achilles or Ulysses,	  Greater than memory of Achilles or Ulysses,
  More, more by far to thee than tomb of Alexander,	  More, more by far to thee than tomb of Alexander,	  More, more by far to thee than tomb of Alexander,	  More, more by far to thee than tomb of Alexander,
  Those cart loads of old charnel ashes, scales and splints of mouldy bones,	  Those cart loads of old charnel ashes, scales and splints of mouldy bones,	  Those cart loads of old charnel ashes, scales and splints of mouldy bones,	  Those cart loads of old charnel ashes, scales and splints of mouldy bones,
  Once living men--once resolute courage, aspiration, strength,	  Once living men--once resolute courage, aspiration, strength,	  Once living men--once resolute courage, aspiration, strength,	  Once living men--once resolute courage, aspiration, strength,
  The stepping stones to thee to-day and here, America.	  The stepping stones to thee to-day and here, America.	  The stepping stones to thee to-day and here, America.	  The stepping stones to thee to-day and here, America.
			
			
			
			
The First Dandelion	The First Dandelion	The First Dandelion	The First Dandelion
			
  Simple and fresh and fair from winter's close emerging,	  Simple and fresh and fair from winter's close emerging,	  Simple and fresh and fair from winter's close emerging,	  Simple and fresh and fair from winter's close emerging,
  As if no artifice of fashion, business, politics, had ever been,	  As if no artifice of fashion, business, politics, had ever been,	  As if no artifice of fashion, business, politics, had ever been,	  As if no artifice of fashion, business, politics, had ever been,
  Forth from its sunny nook of shelter'd grass--innocent, golden, calm	  Forth from its sunny nook of shelter'd grass--innocent, golden, calm	  Forth from its sunny nook of shelter'd grass--innocent, golden, calm	  Forth from its sunny nook of shelter'd grass--innocent, golden, calm
      as the dawn,	      as the dawn,	      as the dawn,	      as the dawn,
  The spring's first dandelion shows its trustful face.	  The spring's first dandelion shows its trustful face.	  The spring's first dandelion shows its trustful face.	  The spring's first dandelion shows its trustful face.
			
			
			
			
America	America	America	America
			
  Centre of equal daughters, equal sons,	  Centre of equal daughters, equal sons,	  Centre of equal daughters, equal sons,	  Centre of equal daughters, equal sons,
  All, all alike endear'd, grown, ungrown, young or old,	  All, all alike endear'd, grown, ungrown, young or old,	  All, all alike endear'd, grown, ungrown, young or old,	  All, all alike endear'd, grown, ungrown, young or old,
  Strong, ample, fair, enduring, capable, rich,	  Strong, ample, fair, enduring, capable, rich,	  Strong, ample, fair, enduring, capable, rich,	  Strong, ample, fair, enduring, capable, rich,
  Perennial with the Earth, with Freedom, Law and Love,	  Perennial with the Earth, with Freedom, Law and Love,	  Perennial with the Earth, with Freedom, Law and Love,	  Perennial with the Earth, with Freedom, Law and Love,
  A grand, sane, towering, seated Mother,	  A grand, sane, towering, seated Mother,	  A grand, sane, towering, seated Mother,	  A grand, sane, towering, seated Mother,
  Chair'd in the adamant of Time.	  Chair'd in the adamant of Time.	  Chair'd in the adamant of Time.	  Chair'd in the adamant of Time.
			
			
			
			
Memories	Memories	Memories	Memories
			
  How sweet the silent backward tracings!	  How sweet the silent backward tracings!	  How sweet the silent backward tracings!	  How sweet the silent backward tracings!
  The wanderings as in dreams--the meditation of old times resumed	  The wanderings as in dreams--the meditation of old times resumed	  The wanderings as in dreams--the meditation of old times resumed	  The wanderings as in dreams--the meditation of old times resumed
      --their loves, joys, persons, voyages.	      --their loves, joys, persons, voyages.	      --their loves, joys, persons, voyages.	      --their loves, joys, persons, voyages.
			
			
			
			
To-Day and Thee	To-Day and Thee	To-Day and Thee	To-Day and Thee
			
  The appointed winners in a long-stretch'd game;	  The appointed winners in a long-stretch'd game;	  The appointed winners in a long-stretch'd game;	  The appointed winners in a long-stretch'd game;
  The course of Time and nations--Egypt, India, Greece and Rome;	  The course of Time and nations--Egypt, India, Greece and Rome;	  The course of Time and nations--Egypt, India, Greece and Rome;	  The course of Time and nations--Egypt, India, Greece and Rome;
  The past entire, with all its heroes, histories, arts, experiments,	  The past entire, with all its heroes, histories, arts, experiments,	  The past entire, with all its heroes, histories, arts, experiments,	  The past entire, with all its heroes, histories, arts, experiments,
  Its store of songs, inventions, voyages, teachers, books,	  Its store of songs, inventions, voyages, teachers, books,	  Its store of songs, inventions, voyages, teachers, books,	  Its store of songs, inventions, voyages, teachers, books,
  Garner'd for now and thee--To think of it!	  Garner'd for now and thee--To think of it!	  Garner'd for now and thee--To think of it!	  Garner'd for now and thee--To think of it!
  The heirdom all converged in thee!	  The heirdom all converged in thee!	  The heirdom all converged in thee!	  The heirdom all converged in thee!
			
			
			
			
After the Dazzle of Day	After the Dazzle of Day	After the Dazzle of Day	After the Dazzle of Day
			
  After the dazzle of day is gone,	  After the dazzle of day is gone,	  After the dazzle of day is gone,	  After the dazzle of day is gone,
  Only the dark, dark night shows to my eyes the stars;	  Only the dark, dark night shows to my eyes the stars;	  Only the dark, dark night shows to my eyes the stars;	  Only the dark, dark night shows to my eyes the stars;
  After the clangor of organ majestic, or chorus, or perfect band,	  After the clangor of organ majestic, or chorus, or perfect band,	  After the clangor of organ majestic, or chorus, or perfect band,	  After the clangor of organ majestic, or chorus, or perfect band,
  Silent, athwart my soul, moves the symphony true.	  Silent, athwart my soul, moves the symphony true.	  Silent, athwart my soul, moves the symphony true.	  Silent, athwart my soul, moves the symphony true.
			
			
			
			
Abraham Lincoln, Born Feb. 12, 1809	Abraham Lincoln, Born Feb. 12, 1809	Abraham Lincoln, Born Feb. 12, 1809	Abraham Lincoln, Born Feb. 12, 1809
			
  To-day, from each and all, a breath of prayer--a pulse of thought,	  To-day, from each and all, a breath of prayer--a pulse of thought,	  To-day, from each and all, a breath of prayer--a pulse of thought,	  To-day, from each and all, a breath of prayer--a pulse of thought,
  To memory of Him--to birth of Him.	  To memory of Him--to birth of Him.	  To memory of Him--to birth of Him.	  To memory of Him--to birth of Him.
			
			
			
			
Out of May's Shows Selected	Out of May's Shows Selected	Out of May's Shows Selected	Out of May's Shows Selected
			
  Apple orchards, the trees all cover'd with blossoms;	  Apple orchards, the trees all cover'd with blossoms;	  Apple orchards, the trees all cover'd with blossoms;	  Apple orchards, the trees all cover'd with blossoms;
  Wheat fields carpeted far and near in vital emerald green;	  Wheat fields carpeted far and near in vital emerald green;	  Wheat fields carpeted far and near in vital emerald green;	  Wheat fields carpeted far and near in vital emerald green;
  The eternal, exhaustless freshness of each early morning;	  The eternal, exhaustless freshness of each early morning;	  The eternal, exhaustless freshness of each early morning;	  The eternal, exhaustless freshness of each early morning;
  The yellow, golden, transparent haze of the warm afternoon sun;	  The yellow, golden, transparent haze of the warm afternoon sun;	  The yellow, golden, transparent haze of the warm afternoon sun;	  The yellow, golden, transparent haze of the warm afternoon sun;
  The aspiring lilac bushes with profuse purple or white flowers.	  The aspiring lilac bushes with profuse purple or white flowers.	  The aspiring lilac bushes with profuse purple or white flowers.	  The aspiring lilac bushes with profuse purple or white flowers.
			
			
			
			
Halcyon Days	Halcyon Days	Halcyon Days	Halcyon Days
			
  Not from successful love alone,	  Not from successful love alone,	  Not from successful love alone,	  Not from successful love alone,
  Nor wealth, nor honor'd middle age, nor victories of politics or war;	  Nor wealth, nor honor'd middle age, nor victories of politics or war;	  Nor wealth, nor honor'd middle age, nor victories of politics or war;	  Nor wealth, nor honor'd middle age, nor victories of politics or war;
  But as life wanes, and all the turbulent passions calm,	  But as life wanes, and all the turbulent passions calm,	  But as life wanes, and all the turbulent passions calm,	  But as life wanes, and all the turbulent passions calm,
  As gorgeous, vapory, silent hues cover the evening sky,	  As gorgeous, vapory, silent hues cover the evening sky,	  As gorgeous, vapory, silent hues cover the evening sky,	  As gorgeous, vapory, silent hues cover the evening sky,
  As softness, fulness, rest, suffuse the frame, like freshier, balmier air,	  As softness, fulness, rest, suffuse the frame, like freshier, balmier air,	  As softness, fulness, rest, suffuse the frame, like freshier, balmier air,	  As softness, fulness, rest, suffuse the frame, like freshier, balmier air,
  As the days take on a mellower light, and the apple at last hangs	  As the days take on a mellower light, and the apple at last hangs	  As the days take on a mellower light, and the apple at last hangs	  As the days take on a mellower light, and the apple at last hangs
      really finish'd and indolent-ripe on the tree,	      really finish'd and indolent-ripe on the tree,	      really finish'd and indolent-ripe on the tree,	      really finish'd and indolent-ripe on the tree,
  Then for the teeming quietest, happiest days of all!	  Then for the teeming quietest, happiest days of all!	  Then for the teeming quietest, happiest days of all!	  Then for the teeming quietest, happiest days of all!
  The brooding and blissful halcyon days!	  The brooding and blissful halcyon days!	  The brooding and blissful halcyon days!	  The brooding and blissful halcyon days!
			
			
			
FANCIES AT NAVESINK	FANCIES AT NAVESINK	FANCIES AT NAVESINK	FANCIES AT NAVESINK
			
   [I]  The Pilot in the Mist	   [I]  The Pilot in the Mist	   [I]  The Pilot in the Mist	   [I]  The Pilot in the Mist
			
  Steaming the northern rapids--(an old St. Lawrence reminiscence,	  Steaming the northern rapids--(an old St. Lawrence reminiscence,	  Steaming the northern rapids--(an old St. Lawrence reminiscence,	  Steaming the northern rapids--(an old St. Lawrence reminiscence,
  A sudden memory-flash comes back, I know not why,	  A sudden memory-flash comes back, I know not why,	  A sudden memory-flash comes back, I know not why,	  A sudden memory-flash comes back, I know not why,
  Here waiting for the sunrise, gazing from this hill;)	  Here waiting for the sunrise, gazing from this hill;)	  Here waiting for the sunrise, gazing from this hill;)	  Here waiting for the sunrise, gazing from this hill;)
  Again 'tis just at morning--a heavy haze contends with daybreak,	  Again 'tis just at morning--a heavy haze contends with daybreak,	  Again 'tis just at morning--a heavy haze contends with daybreak,	  Again 'tis just at morning--a heavy haze contends with daybreak,
  Again the trembling, laboring vessel veers me--I press through	  Again the trembling, laboring vessel veers me--I press through	  Again the trembling, laboring vessel veers me--I press through	  Again the trembling, laboring vessel veers me--I press through
      foam-dash'd rocks that almost touch me,	      foam-dash'd rocks that almost touch me,	      foam-dash'd rocks that almost touch me,	      foam-dash'd rocks that almost touch me,
  Again I mark where aft the small thin Indian helmsman	  Again I mark where aft the small thin Indian helmsman	  Again I mark where aft the small thin Indian helmsman	  Again I mark where aft the small thin Indian helmsman
  Looms in the mist, with brow elate and governing hand.	  Looms in the mist, with brow elate and governing hand.	  Looms in the mist, with brow elate and governing hand.	  Looms in the mist, with brow elate and governing hand.
			
			
			
  [II]  Had I the Choice	  [II]  Had I the Choice	  [II]  Had I the Choice	  [II]  Had I the Choice
			
  Had I the choice to tally greatest bards,	  Had I the choice to tally greatest bards,	  Had I the choice to tally greatest bards,	  Had I the choice to tally greatest bards,
  To limn their portraits, stately, beautiful, and emulate at will,	  To limn their portraits, stately, beautiful, and emulate at will,	  To limn their portraits, stately, beautiful, and emulate at will,	  To limn their portraits, stately, beautiful, and emulate at will,
  Homer with all his wars and warriors--Hector, Achilles, Ajax,	  Homer with all his wars and warriors--Hector, Achilles, Ajax,	  Homer with all his wars and warriors--Hector, Achilles, Ajax,	  Homer with all his wars and warriors--Hector, Achilles, Ajax,
  Or Shakspere's woe-entangled Hamlet, Lear, Othello--Tennyson's fair ladies,	  Or Shakspere's woe-entangled Hamlet, Lear, Othello--Tennyson's fair ladies,	  Or Shakspere's woe-entangled Hamlet, Lear, Othello--Tennyson's fair ladies,	  Or Shakspere's woe-entangled Hamlet, Lear, Othello--Tennyson's fair ladies,
  Metre or wit the best, or choice conceit to wield in perfect rhyme,	  Metre or wit the best, or choice conceit to wield in perfect rhyme,	  Metre or wit the best, or choice conceit to wield in perfect rhyme,	  Metre or wit the best, or choice conceit to wield in perfect rhyme,
      delight of singers;	      delight of singers;	      delight of singers;	      delight of singers;
  These, these, O sea, all these I'd gladly barter,	  These, these, O sea, all these I'd gladly barter,	  These, these, O sea, all these I'd gladly barter,	  These, these, O sea, all these I'd gladly barter,
  Would you the undulation of one wave, its trick to me transfer,	  Would you the undulation of one wave, its trick to me transfer,	  Would you the undulation of one wave, its trick to me transfer,	  Would you the undulation of one wave, its trick to me transfer,
  Or breathe one breath of yours upon my verse,	  Or breathe one breath of yours upon my verse,	  Or breathe one breath of yours upon my verse,	  Or breathe one breath of yours upon my verse,
  And leave its odor there.	  And leave its odor there.	  And leave its odor there.	  And leave its odor there.
			
			
			
  [III]  You Tides with Ceaseless Swell	  [III]  You Tides with Ceaseless Swell	  [III]  You Tides with Ceaseless Swell	  [III]  You Tides with Ceaseless Swell
			
  You tides with ceaseless swell! you power that does this work!	  You tides with ceaseless swell! you power that does this work!	  You tides with ceaseless swell! you power that does this work!	  You tides with ceaseless swell! you power that does this work!
  You unseen force, centripetal, centrifugal, through space's spread,	  You unseen force, centripetal, centrifugal, through space's spread,	  You unseen force, centripetal, centrifugal, through space's spread,	  You unseen force, centripetal, centrifugal, through space's spread,
  Rapport of sun, moon, earth, and all the constellations,	  Rapport of sun, moon, earth, and all the constellations,	  Rapport of sun, moon, earth, and all the constellations,	  Rapport of sun, moon, earth, and all the constellations,
  What are the messages by you from distant stars to us? what Sirius'?	  What are the messages by you from distant stars to us? what Sirius'?	  What are the messages by you from distant stars to us? what Sirius'?	  What are the messages by you from distant stars to us? what Sirius'?
      what Capella's?	      what Capella's?	      what Capella's?	      what Capella's?
  What central heart--and you the pulse--vivifies all? what boundless	  What central heart--and you the pulse--vivifies all? what boundless	  What central heart--and you the pulse--vivifies all? what boundless	  What central heart--and you the pulse--vivifies all? what boundless
      aggregate of all?	      aggregate of all?	      aggregate of all?	      aggregate of all?
  What subtle indirection and significance in you? what clue to all in	  What subtle indirection and significance in you? what clue to all in	  What subtle indirection and significance in you? what clue to all in	  What subtle indirection and significance in you? what clue to all in
      you? what fluid, vast identity,	      you? what fluid, vast identity,	      you? what fluid, vast identity,	      you? what fluid, vast identity,
  Holding the universe with all its parts as one--as sailing in a ship?	  Holding the universe with all its parts as one--as sailing in a ship?	  Holding the universe with all its parts as one--as sailing in a ship?	  Holding the universe with all its parts as one--as sailing in a ship?
			
			
			
  [IV]  Last of Ebb, and Daylight Waning	  [IV]  Last of Ebb, and Daylight Waning	  [IV]  Last of Ebb, and Daylight Waning	  [IV]  Last of Ebb, and Daylight Waning
			
  Last of ebb, and daylight waning,	  Last of ebb, and daylight waning,	  Last of ebb, and daylight waning,	  Last of ebb, and daylight waning,
  Scented sea-cool landward making, smells of sedge and salt incoming,	  Scented sea-cool landward making, smells of sedge and salt incoming,	  Scented sea-cool landward making, smells of sedge and salt incoming,	  Scented sea-cool landward making, smells of sedge and salt incoming,
  With many a half-caught voice sent up from the eddies,	  With many a half-caught voice sent up from the eddies,	  With many a half-caught voice sent up from the eddies,	  With many a half-caught voice sent up from the eddies,
  Many a muffled confession--many a sob and whisper'd word,	  Many a muffled confession--many a sob and whisper'd word,	  Many a muffled confession--many a sob and whisper'd word,	  Many a muffled confession--many a sob and whisper'd word,
  As of speakers far or hid.	  As of speakers far or hid.	  As of speakers far or hid.	  As of speakers far or hid.
			
  How they sweep down and out! how they mutter!	  How they sweep down and out! how they mutter!	  How they sweep down and out! how they mutter!	  How they sweep down and out! how they mutter!
  Poets unnamed--artists greatest of any, with cherish'd lost designs,	  Poets unnamed--artists greatest of any, with cherish'd lost designs,	  Poets unnamed--artists greatest of any, with cherish'd lost designs,	  Poets unnamed--artists greatest of any, with cherish'd lost designs,
  Love's unresponse--a chorus of age's complaints--hope's last words,	  Love's unresponse--a chorus of age's complaints--hope's last words,	  Love's unresponse--a chorus of age's complaints--hope's last words,	  Love's unresponse--a chorus of age's complaints--hope's last words,
  Some suicide's despairing cry, Away to the boundless waste, and	  Some suicide's despairing cry, Away to the boundless waste, and	  Some suicide's despairing cry, Away to the boundless waste, and	  Some suicide's despairing cry, Away to the boundless waste, and
      never again return.	      never again return.	      never again return.	      never again return.
			
  On to oblivion then!	  On to oblivion then!	  On to oblivion then!	  On to oblivion then!
  On, on, and do your part, ye burying, ebbing tide!	  On, on, and do your part, ye burying, ebbing tide!	  On, on, and do your part, ye burying, ebbing tide!	  On, on, and do your part, ye burying, ebbing tide!
  On for your time, ye furious debouche!	  On for your time, ye furious debouche!	  On for your time, ye furious debouche!	  On for your time, ye furious debouche!
			
			
			
  [V]  And Yet Not You Alone	  [V]  And Yet Not You Alone	  [V]  And Yet Not You Alone	  [V]  And Yet Not You Alone
			
  And yet not you alone, twilight and burying ebb,	  And yet not you alone, twilight and burying ebb,	  And yet not you alone, twilight and burying ebb,	  And yet not you alone, twilight and burying ebb,
  Nor you, ye lost designs alone--nor failures, aspirations;	  Nor you, ye lost designs alone--nor failures, aspirations;	  Nor you, ye lost designs alone--nor failures, aspirations;	  Nor you, ye lost designs alone--nor failures, aspirations;
  I know, divine deceitful ones, your glamour's seeming;	  I know, divine deceitful ones, your glamour's seeming;	  I know, divine deceitful ones, your glamour's seeming;	  I know, divine deceitful ones, your glamour's seeming;
  Duly by you, from you, the tide and light again--duly the hinges turning,	  Duly by you, from you, the tide and light again--duly the hinges turning,	  Duly by you, from you, the tide and light again--duly the hinges turning,	  Duly by you, from you, the tide and light again--duly the hinges turning,
  Duly the needed discord-parts offsetting, blending,	  Duly the needed discord-parts offsetting, blending,	  Duly the needed discord-parts offsetting, blending,	  Duly the needed discord-parts offsetting, blending,
  Weaving from you, from Sleep, Night, Death itself,	  Weaving from you, from Sleep, Night, Death itself,	  Weaving from you, from Sleep, Night, Death itself,	  Weaving from you, from Sleep, Night, Death itself,
  The rhythmus of Birth eternal.	  The rhythmus of Birth eternal.	  The rhythmus of Birth eternal.	  The rhythmus of Birth eternal.
			
			
			
  [VI]  Proudly the Flood Comes In	  [VI]  Proudly the Flood Comes In	  [VI]  Proudly the Flood Comes In	  [VI]  Proudly the Flood Comes In
			
  Proudly the flood comes in, shouting, foaming, advancing,	  Proudly the flood comes in, shouting, foaming, advancing,	  Proudly the flood comes in, shouting, foaming, advancing,	  Proudly the flood comes in, shouting, foaming, advancing,
  Long it holds at the high, with bosom broad outswelling,	  Long it holds at the high, with bosom broad outswelling,	  Long it holds at the high, with bosom broad outswelling,	  Long it holds at the high, with bosom broad outswelling,
  All throbs, dilates--the farms, woods, streets of cities--workmen at work,	  All throbs, dilates--the farms, woods, streets of cities--workmen at work,	  All throbs, dilates--the farms, woods, streets of cities--workmen at work,	  All throbs, dilates--the farms, woods, streets of cities--workmen at work,
  Mainsails, topsails, jibs, appear in the offing--steamers' pennants	  Mainsails, topsails, jibs, appear in the offing--steamers' pennants	  Mainsails, topsails, jibs, appear in the offing--steamers' pennants	  Mainsails, topsails, jibs, appear in the offing--steamers' pennants
      of smoke--and under the forenoon sun,	      of smoke--and under the forenoon sun,	      of smoke--and under the forenoon sun,	      of smoke--and under the forenoon sun,
  Freighted with human lives, gaily the outward bound, gaily the	  Freighted with human lives, gaily the outward bound, gaily the	  Freighted with human lives, gaily the outward bound, gaily the	  Freighted with human lives, gaily the outward bound, gaily the
      inward bound,	      inward bound,	      inward bound,	      inward bound,
  Flaunting from many a spar the flag I love.	  Flaunting from many a spar the flag I love.	  Flaunting from many a spar the flag I love.	  Flaunting from many a spar the flag I love.
			
			
			
  [VII]  By That Long Scan of Waves	  [VII]  By That Long Scan of Waves	  [VII]  By That Long Scan of Waves	  [VII]  By That Long Scan of Waves
			
  By that long scan of waves, myself call'd back, resumed upon myself,	  By that long scan of waves, myself call'd back, resumed upon myself,	  By that long scan of waves, myself call'd back, resumed upon myself,	  By that long scan of waves, myself call'd back, resumed upon myself,
  In every crest some undulating light or shade--some retrospect,	  In every crest some undulating light or shade--some retrospect,	  In every crest some undulating light or shade--some retrospect,	  In every crest some undulating light or shade--some retrospect,
  Joys, travels, studies, silent panoramas--scenes ephemeral,	  Joys, travels, studies, silent panoramas--scenes ephemeral,	  Joys, travels, studies, silent panoramas--scenes ephemeral,	  Joys, travels, studies, silent panoramas--scenes ephemeral,
  The long past war, the battles, hospital sights, the wounded and the dead,	  The long past war, the battles, hospital sights, the wounded and the dead,	  The long past war, the battles, hospital sights, the wounded and the dead,	  The long past war, the battles, hospital sights, the wounded and the dead,
  Myself through every by-gone phase--my idle youth--old age at hand,	  Myself through every by-gone phase--my idle youth--old age at hand,	  Myself through every by-gone phase--my idle youth--old age at hand,	  Myself through every by-gone phase--my idle youth--old age at hand,
  My three-score years of life summ'd up, and more, and past,	  My three-score years of life summ'd up, and more, and past,	  My three-score years of life summ'd up, and more, and past,	  My three-score years of life summ'd up, and more, and past,
  By any grand ideal tried, intentionless, the whole a nothing,	  By any grand ideal tried, intentionless, the whole a nothing,	  By any grand ideal tried, intentionless, the whole a nothing,	  By any grand ideal tried, intentionless, the whole a nothing,
  And haply yet some drop within God's scheme's ensemble--some	  And haply yet some drop within God's scheme's ensemble--some	  And haply yet some drop within God's scheme's ensemble--some	  And haply yet some drop within God's scheme's ensemble--some
      wave, or part of wave,	      wave, or part of wave,	      wave, or part of wave,	      wave, or part of wave,
  Like one of yours, ye multitudinous ocean.	  Like one of yours, ye multitudinous ocean.	  Like one of yours, ye multitudinous ocean.	  Like one of yours, ye multitudinous ocean.
			
			
			
  [VIII]  Then Last Of All	  [VIII]  Then Last Of All	  [VIII]  Then Last Of All	  [VIII]  Then Last Of All
			
  Then last of all, caught from these shores, this hill,	  Then last of all, caught from these shores, this hill,	  Then last of all, caught from these shores, this hill,	  Then last of all, caught from these shores, this hill,
  Of you O tides, the mystic human meaning:	  Of you O tides, the mystic human meaning:	  Of you O tides, the mystic human meaning:	  Of you O tides, the mystic human meaning:
  Only by law of you, your swell and ebb, enclosing me the same,	  Only by law of you, your swell and ebb, enclosing me the same,	  Only by law of you, your swell and ebb, enclosing me the same,	  Only by law of you, your swell and ebb, enclosing me the same,
  The brain that shapes, the voice that chants this song.	  The brain that shapes, the voice that chants this song.	  The brain that shapes, the voice that chants this song.	  The brain that shapes, the voice that chants this song.
			
			
			
			
Election Day, November, 1884	Election Day, November, 1884	Election Day, November, 1884	Election Day, November, 1884
			
  If I should need to name, O Western World, your powerfulest scene and show,	  If I should need to name, O Western World, your powerfulest scene and show,	  If I should need to name, O Western World, your powerfulest scene and show,	  If I should need to name, O Western World, your powerfulest scene and show,
  'Twould not be you, Niagara--nor you, ye limitless prairies--nor	  'Twould not be you, Niagara--nor you, ye limitless prairies--nor	  'Twould not be you, Niagara--nor you, ye limitless prairies--nor	  'Twould not be you, Niagara--nor you, ye limitless prairies--nor
      your huge rifts of canyons, Colorado,	      your huge rifts of canyons, Colorado,	      your huge rifts of canyons, Colorado,	      your huge rifts of canyons, Colorado,
  Nor you, Yosemite--nor Yellowstone, with all its spasmic	  Nor you, Yosemite--nor Yellowstone, with all its spasmic	  Nor you, Yosemite--nor Yellowstone, with all its spasmic	  Nor you, Yosemite--nor Yellowstone, with all its spasmic
      geyser-loops ascending to the skies, appearing and disappearing,	      geyser-loops ascending to the skies, appearing and disappearing,	      geyser-loops ascending to the skies, appearing and disappearing,	      geyser-loops ascending to the skies, appearing and disappearing,
  Nor Oregon's white cones--nor Huron's belt of mighty lakes--nor	  Nor Oregon's white cones--nor Huron's belt of mighty lakes--nor	  Nor Oregon's white cones--nor Huron's belt of mighty lakes--nor	  Nor Oregon's white cones--nor Huron's belt of mighty lakes--nor
      Mississippi's stream:	      Mississippi's stream:	      Mississippi's stream:	      Mississippi's stream:
  --This seething hemisphere's humanity, as now, I'd name--the still	  --This seething hemisphere's humanity, as now, I'd name--the still	  --This seething hemisphere's humanity, as now, I'd name--the still	  --This seething hemisphere's humanity, as now, I'd name--the still
      small voice vibrating--America's choosing day,	      small voice vibrating--America's choosing day,	      small voice vibrating--America's choosing day,	      small voice vibrating--America's choosing day,
  (The heart of it not in the chosen--the act itself the main, the	  (The heart of it not in the chosen--the act itself the main, the	  (The heart of it not in the chosen--the act itself the main, the	  (The heart of it not in the chosen--the act itself the main, the
      quadriennial choosing,)	      quadriennial choosing,)	      quadriennial choosing,)	      quadriennial choosing,)
  The stretch of North and South arous'd--sea-board and inland--	  The stretch of North and South arous'd--sea-board and inland--	  The stretch of North and South arous'd--sea-board and inland--	  The stretch of North and South arous'd--sea-board and inland--
      Texas to Maine--the Prairie States--Vermont, Virginia, California,	      Texas to Maine--the Prairie States--Vermont, Virginia, California,	      Texas to Maine--the Prairie States--Vermont, Virginia, California,	      Texas to Maine--the Prairie States--Vermont, Virginia, California,
  The final ballot-shower from East to West--the paradox and conflict,	  The final ballot-shower from East to West--the paradox and conflict,	  The final ballot-shower from East to West--the paradox and conflict,	  The final ballot-shower from East to West--the paradox and conflict,
  The countless snow-flakes falling--(a swordless conflict,	  The countless snow-flakes falling--(a swordless conflict,	  The countless snow-flakes falling--(a swordless conflict,	  The countless snow-flakes falling--(a swordless conflict,
  Yet more than all Rome's wars of old, or modern Napoleon's:) the	  Yet more than all Rome's wars of old, or modern Napoleon's:) the	  Yet more than all Rome's wars of old, or modern Napoleon's:) the	  Yet more than all Rome's wars of old, or modern Napoleon's:) the
      peaceful choice of all,	      peaceful choice of all,	      peaceful choice of all,	      peaceful choice of all,
  Or good or ill humanity--welcoming the darker odds, the dross:	  Or good or ill humanity--welcoming the darker odds, the dross:	  Or good or ill humanity--welcoming the darker odds, the dross:	  Or good or ill humanity--welcoming the darker odds, the dross:
  --Foams and ferments the wine? it serves to purify--while the heart	  --Foams and ferments the wine? it serves to purify--while the heart	  --Foams and ferments the wine? it serves to purify--while the heart	  --Foams and ferments the wine? it serves to purify--while the heart
      pants, life glows:	      pants, life glows:	      pants, life glows:	      pants, life glows:
  These stormy gusts and winds waft precious ships,	  These stormy gusts and winds waft precious ships,	  These stormy gusts and winds waft precious ships,	  These stormy gusts and winds waft precious ships,
  Swell'd Washington's, Jefferson's, Lincoln's sails.	  Swell'd Washington's, Jefferson's, Lincoln's sails.	  Swell'd Washington's, Jefferson's, Lincoln's sails.	  Swell'd Washington's, Jefferson's, Lincoln's sails.
			
			
			
			
With Husky-Haughty Lips, O Sea!	With Husky-Haughty Lips, O Sea!	With Husky-Haughty Lips, O Sea!	With Husky-Haughty Lips, O Sea!
			
  With husky-haughty lips, O sea!	  With husky-haughty lips, O sea!	  With husky-haughty lips, O sea!	  With husky-haughty lips, O sea!
  Where day and night I wend thy surf-beat shore,	  Where day and night I wend thy surf-beat shore,	  Where day and night I wend thy surf-beat shore,	  Where day and night I wend thy surf-beat shore,
  Imaging to my sense thy varied strange suggestions,	  Imaging to my sense thy varied strange suggestions,	  Imaging to my sense thy varied strange suggestions,	  Imaging to my sense thy varied strange suggestions,
  (I see and plainly list thy talk and conference here,)	  (I see and plainly list thy talk and conference here,)	  (I see and plainly list thy talk and conference here,)	  (I see and plainly list thy talk and conference here,)
  Thy troops of white-maned racers racing to the goal,	  Thy troops of white-maned racers racing to the goal,	  Thy troops of white-maned racers racing to the goal,	  Thy troops of white-maned racers racing to the goal,
  Thy ample, smiling face, dash'd with the sparkling dimples of the sun,	  Thy ample, smiling face, dash'd with the sparkling dimples of the sun,	  Thy ample, smiling face, dash'd with the sparkling dimples of the sun,	  Thy ample, smiling face, dash'd with the sparkling dimples of the sun,
  Thy brooding scowl and murk--thy unloos'd hurricanes,	  Thy brooding scowl and murk--thy unloos'd hurricanes,	  Thy brooding scowl and murk--thy unloos'd hurricanes,	  Thy brooding scowl and murk--thy unloos'd hurricanes,
  Thy unsubduedness, caprices, wilfulness;	  Thy unsubduedness, caprices, wilfulness;	  Thy unsubduedness, caprices, wilfulness;	  Thy unsubduedness, caprices, wilfulness;
  Great as thou art above the rest, thy many tears--a lack from all	  Great as thou art above the rest, thy many tears--a lack from all	  Great as thou art above the rest, thy many tears--a lack from all	  Great as thou art above the rest, thy many tears--a lack from all
      eternity in thy content,	      eternity in thy content,	      eternity in thy content,	      eternity in thy content,
  (Naught but the greatest struggles, wrongs, defeats, could make thee	  (Naught but the greatest struggles, wrongs, defeats, could make thee	  (Naught but the greatest struggles, wrongs, defeats, could make thee	  (Naught but the greatest struggles, wrongs, defeats, could make thee
      greatest--no less could make thee,)	      greatest--no less could make thee,)	      greatest--no less could make thee,)	      greatest--no less could make thee,)
  Thy lonely state--something thou ever seek'st and seek'st, yet	  Thy lonely state--something thou ever seek'st and seek'st, yet	  Thy lonely state--something thou ever seek'st and seek'st, yet	  Thy lonely state--something thou ever seek'st and seek'st, yet
      never gain'st,	      never gain'st,	      never gain'st,	      never gain'st,
  Surely some right withheld--some voice, in huge monotonous rage, of	  Surely some right withheld--some voice, in huge monotonous rage, of	  Surely some right withheld--some voice, in huge monotonous rage, of	  Surely some right withheld--some voice, in huge monotonous rage, of
      freedom-lover pent,	      freedom-lover pent,	      freedom-lover pent,	      freedom-lover pent,
  Some vast heart, like a planet's, chain'd and chafing in those breakers,	  Some vast heart, like a planet's, chain'd and chafing in those breakers,	  Some vast heart, like a planet's, chain'd and chafing in those breakers,	  Some vast heart, like a planet's, chain'd and chafing in those breakers,
  By lengthen'd swell, and spasm, and panting breath,	  By lengthen'd swell, and spasm, and panting breath,	  By lengthen'd swell, and spasm, and panting breath,	  By lengthen'd swell, and spasm, and panting breath,
  And rhythmic rasping of thy sands and waves,	  And rhythmic rasping of thy sands and waves,	  And rhythmic rasping of thy sands and waves,	  And rhythmic rasping of thy sands and waves,
  And serpent hiss, and savage peals of laughter,	  And serpent hiss, and savage peals of laughter,	  And serpent hiss, and savage peals of laughter,	  And serpent hiss, and savage peals of laughter,
  And undertones of distant lion roar,	  And undertones of distant lion roar,	  And undertones of distant lion roar,	  And undertones of distant lion roar,
  (Sounding, appealing to the sky's deaf ear--but now, rapport for once,	  (Sounding, appealing to the sky's deaf ear--but now, rapport for once,	  (Sounding, appealing to the sky's deaf ear--but now, rapport for once,	  (Sounding, appealing to the sky's deaf ear--but now, rapport for once,
  A phantom in the night thy confidant for once,)	  A phantom in the night thy confidant for once,)	  A phantom in the night thy confidant for once,)	  A phantom in the night thy confidant for once,)
  The first and last confession of the globe,	  The first and last confession of the globe,	  The first and last confession of the globe,	  The first and last confession of the globe,
  Outsurging, muttering from thy soul's abysms,	  Outsurging, muttering from thy soul's abysms,	  Outsurging, muttering from thy soul's abysms,	  Outsurging, muttering from thy soul's abysms,
  The tale of cosmic elemental passion,	  The tale of cosmic elemental passion,	  The tale of cosmic elemental passion,	  The tale of cosmic elemental passion,
  Thou tellest to a kindred soul.	  Thou tellest to a kindred soul.	  Thou tellest to a kindred soul.	  Thou tellest to a kindred soul.
			
			
			
			
Death of General Grant	Death of General Grant	Death of General Grant	Death of General Grant
			
  As one by one withdraw the lofty actors,	  As one by one withdraw the lofty actors,	  As one by one withdraw the lofty actors,	  As one by one withdraw the lofty actors,
  From that great play on history's stage eterne,	  From that great play on history's stage eterne,	  From that great play on history's stage eterne,	  From that great play on history's stage eterne,
  That lurid, partial act of war and peace--of old and new contending,	  That lurid, partial act of war and peace--of old and new contending,	  That lurid, partial act of war and peace--of old and new contending,	  That lurid, partial act of war and peace--of old and new contending,
  Fought out through wrath, fears, dark dismays, and many a long suspense;	  Fought out through wrath, fears, dark dismays, and many a long suspense;	  Fought out through wrath, fears, dark dismays, and many a long suspense;	  Fought out through wrath, fears, dark dismays, and many a long suspense;
  All past--and since, in countless graves receding, mellowing,	  All past--and since, in countless graves receding, mellowing,	  All past--and since, in countless graves receding, mellowing,	  All past--and since, in countless graves receding, mellowing,
  Victor's and vanquish'd--Lincoln's and Lee's--now thou with them,	  Victor's and vanquish'd--Lincoln's and Lee's--now thou with them,	  Victor's and vanquish'd--Lincoln's and Lee's--now thou with them,	  Victor's and vanquish'd--Lincoln's and Lee's--now thou with them,
  Man of the mighty days--and equal to the days!	  Man of the mighty days--and equal to the days!	  Man of the mighty days--and equal to the days!	  Man of the mighty days--and equal to the days!
  Thou from the prairies!--tangled and many-vein'd and hard has been thy part,	  Thou from the prairies!--tangled and many-vein'd and hard has been thy part,	  Thou from the prairies!--tangled and many-vein'd and hard has been thy part,	  Thou from the prairies!--tangled and many-vein'd and hard has been thy part,
  To admiration has it been enacted!	  To admiration has it been enacted!	  To admiration has it been enacted!	  To admiration has it been enacted!
			
			
			
			
Red Jacket (From Aloft)	Red Jacket (From Aloft)	Red Jacket (From Aloft)	Red Jacket (From Aloft)
			
  Upon this scene, this show,	  Upon this scene, this show,	  Upon this scene, this show,	  Upon this scene, this show,
  Yielded to-day by fashion, learning, wealth,	  Yielded to-day by fashion, learning, wealth,	  Yielded to-day by fashion, learning, wealth,	  Yielded to-day by fashion, learning, wealth,
  (Nor in caprice alone--some grains of deepest meaning,)	  (Nor in caprice alone--some grains of deepest meaning,)	  (Nor in caprice alone--some grains of deepest meaning,)	  (Nor in caprice alone--some grains of deepest meaning,)
  Haply, aloft, (who knows?) from distant sky-clouds' blended shapes,	  Haply, aloft, (who knows?) from distant sky-clouds' blended shapes,	  Haply, aloft, (who knows?) from distant sky-clouds' blended shapes,	  Haply, aloft, (who knows?) from distant sky-clouds' blended shapes,
  As some old tree, or rock or cliff, thrill'd with its soul,	  As some old tree, or rock or cliff, thrill'd with its soul,	  As some old tree, or rock or cliff, thrill'd with its soul,	  As some old tree, or rock or cliff, thrill'd with its soul,
  Product of Nature's sun, stars, earth direct--a towering human form,	  Product of Nature's sun, stars, earth direct--a towering human form,	  Product of Nature's sun, stars, earth direct--a towering human form,	  Product of Nature's sun, stars, earth direct--a towering human form,
  In hunting-shirt of film, arm'd with the rifle, a half-ironical	  In hunting-shirt of film, arm'd with the rifle, a half-ironical	  In hunting-shirt of film, arm'd with the rifle, a half-ironical	  In hunting-shirt of film, arm'd with the rifle, a half-ironical
      smile curving its phantom lips,	      smile curving its phantom lips,	      smile curving its phantom lips,	      smile curving its phantom lips,
  Like one of Ossian's ghosts looks down.	  Like one of Ossian's ghosts looks down.	  Like one of Ossian's ghosts looks down.	  Like one of Ossian's ghosts looks down.
			
			
			
			
Washington's Monument February, 1885	Washington's Monument February, 1885	Washington's Monument February, 1885	Washington's Monument February, 1885
			
  Ah, not this marble, dead and cold:	  Ah, not this marble, dead and cold:	  Ah, not this marble, dead and cold:	  Ah, not this marble, dead and cold:
  Far from its base and shaft expanding--the round zones circling,	  Far from its base and shaft expanding--the round zones circling,	  Far from its base and shaft expanding--the round zones circling,	  Far from its base and shaft expanding--the round zones circling,
      comprehending,	      comprehending,	      comprehending,	      comprehending,
  Thou, Washington, art all the world's, the continents' entire--not	  Thou, Washington, art all the world's, the continents' entire--not	  Thou, Washington, art all the world's, the continents' entire--not	  Thou, Washington, art all the world's, the continents' entire--not
      yours alone, America,	      yours alone, America,	      yours alone, America,	      yours alone, America,
  Europe's as well, in every part, castle of lord or laborer's cot,	  Europe's as well, in every part, castle of lord or laborer's cot,	  Europe's as well, in every part, castle of lord or laborer's cot,	  Europe's as well, in every part, castle of lord or laborer's cot,
  Or frozen North, or sultry South--the African's--the Arab's in his tent,	  Or frozen North, or sultry South--the African's--the Arab's in his tent,	  Or frozen North, or sultry South--the African's--the Arab's in his tent,	  Or frozen North, or sultry South--the African's--the Arab's in his tent,
  Old Asia's there with venerable smile, seated amid her ruins;	  Old Asia's there with venerable smile, seated amid her ruins;	  Old Asia's there with venerable smile, seated amid her ruins;	  Old Asia's there with venerable smile, seated amid her ruins;
  (Greets the antique the hero new? 'tis but the same--the heir	  (Greets the antique the hero new? 'tis but the same--the heir	  (Greets the antique the hero new? 'tis but the same--the heir	  (Greets the antique the hero new? 'tis but the same--the heir
      legitimate, continued ever,	      legitimate, continued ever,	      legitimate, continued ever,	      legitimate, continued ever,
  The indomitable heart and arm--proofs of the never-broken line,	  The indomitable heart and arm--proofs of the never-broken line,	  The indomitable heart and arm--proofs of the never-broken line,	  The indomitable heart and arm--proofs of the never-broken line,
  Courage, alertness, patience, faith, the same--e'en in defeat	  Courage, alertness, patience, faith, the same--e'en in defeat	  Courage, alertness, patience, faith, the same--e'en in defeat	  Courage, alertness, patience, faith, the same--e'en in defeat
      defeated not, the same:)	      defeated not, the same:)	      defeated not, the same:)	      defeated not, the same:)
  Wherever sails a ship, or house is built on land, or day or night,	  Wherever sails a ship, or house is built on land, or day or night,	  Wherever sails a ship, or house is built on land, or day or night,	  Wherever sails a ship, or house is built on land, or day or night,
  Through teeming cities' streets, indoors or out, factories or farms,	  Through teeming cities' streets, indoors or out, factories or farms,	  Through teeming cities' streets, indoors or out, factories or farms,	  Through teeming cities' streets, indoors or out, factories or farms,
  Now, or to come, or past--where patriot wills existed or exist,	  Now, or to come, or past--where patriot wills existed or exist,	  Now, or to come, or past--where patriot wills existed or exist,	  Now, or to come, or past--where patriot wills existed or exist,
  Wherever Freedom, pois'd by Toleration, sway'd by Law,	  Wherever Freedom, pois'd by Toleration, sway'd by Law,	  Wherever Freedom, pois'd by Toleration, sway'd by Law,	  Wherever Freedom, pois'd by Toleration, sway'd by Law,
  Stands or is rising thy true monument.	  Stands or is rising thy true monument.	  Stands or is rising thy true monument.	  Stands or is rising thy true monument.
			
			
			
			
Of That Blithe Throat of Thine	Of That Blithe Throat of Thine	Of That Blithe Throat of Thine	Of That Blithe Throat of Thine
			
  Of that blithe throat of thine from arctic bleak and blank,	  Of that blithe throat of thine from arctic bleak and blank,	  Of that blithe throat of thine from arctic bleak and blank,	  Of that blithe throat of thine from arctic bleak and blank,
  I'll mind the lesson, solitary bird--let me too welcome chilling drifts,	  I'll mind the lesson, solitary bird--let me too welcome chilling drifts,	  I'll mind the lesson, solitary bird--let me too welcome chilling drifts,	  I'll mind the lesson, solitary bird--let me too welcome chilling drifts,
  E'en the profoundest chill, as now--a torpid pulse, a brain unnerv'd,	  E'en the profoundest chill, as now--a torpid pulse, a brain unnerv'd,	  E'en the profoundest chill, as now--a torpid pulse, a brain unnerv'd,	  E'en the profoundest chill, as now--a torpid pulse, a brain unnerv'd,
  Old age land-lock'd within its winter bay--(cold, cold, O cold!)	  Old age land-lock'd within its winter bay--(cold, cold, O cold!)	  Old age land-lock'd within its winter bay--(cold, cold, O cold!)	  Old age land-lock'd within its winter bay--(cold, cold, O cold!)
  These snowy hairs, my feeble arm, my frozen feet,	  These snowy hairs, my feeble arm, my frozen feet,	  These snowy hairs, my feeble arm, my frozen feet,	  These snowy hairs, my feeble arm, my frozen feet,
  For them thy faith, thy rule I take, and grave it to the last;	  For them thy faith, thy rule I take, and grave it to the last;	  For them thy faith, thy rule I take, and grave it to the last;	  For them thy faith, thy rule I take, and grave it to the last;
  Not summer's zones alone--not chants of youth, or south's warm tides alone,	  Not summer's zones alone--not chants of youth, or south's warm tides alone,	  Not summer's zones alone--not chants of youth, or south's warm tides alone,	  Not summer's zones alone--not chants of youth, or south's warm tides alone,
  But held by sluggish floes, pack'd in the northern ice, the cumulus	  But held by sluggish floes, pack'd in the northern ice, the cumulus	  But held by sluggish floes, pack'd in the northern ice, the cumulus	  But held by sluggish floes, pack'd in the northern ice, the cumulus
      of years,	      of years,	      of years,	      of years,
  These with gay heart I also sing.	  These with gay heart I also sing.	  These with gay heart I also sing.	  These with gay heart I also sing.
			
			
			
			
Broadway	Broadway	Broadway	Broadway
			
  What hurrying human tides, or day or night!	  What hurrying human tides, or day or night!	  What hurrying human tides, or day or night!	  What hurrying human tides, or day or night!
  What passions, winnings, losses, ardors, swim thy waters!	  What passions, winnings, losses, ardors, swim thy waters!	  What passions, winnings, losses, ardors, swim thy waters!	  What passions, winnings, losses, ardors, swim thy waters!
  What whirls of evil, bliss and sorrow, stem thee!	  What whirls of evil, bliss and sorrow, stem thee!	  What whirls of evil, bliss and sorrow, stem thee!	  What whirls of evil, bliss and sorrow, stem thee!
  What curious questioning glances--glints of love!	  What curious questioning glances--glints of love!	  What curious questioning glances--glints of love!	  What curious questioning glances--glints of love!
  Leer, envy, scorn, contempt, hope, aspiration!	  Leer, envy, scorn, contempt, hope, aspiration!	  Leer, envy, scorn, contempt, hope, aspiration!	  Leer, envy, scorn, contempt, hope, aspiration!
  Thou portal--thou arena--thou of the myriad long-drawn lines and groups!	  Thou portal--thou arena--thou of the myriad long-drawn lines and groups!	  Thou portal--thou arena--thou of the myriad long-drawn lines and groups!	  Thou portal--thou arena--thou of the myriad long-drawn lines and groups!
  (Could but thy flagstones, curbs, facades, tell their inimitable tales;	  (Could but thy flagstones, curbs, facades, tell their inimitable tales;	  (Could but thy flagstones, curbs, facades, tell their inimitable tales;	  (Could but thy flagstones, curbs, facades, tell their inimitable tales;
  Thy windows rich, and huge hotels--thy side-walks wide;)	  Thy windows rich, and huge hotels--thy side-walks wide;)	  Thy windows rich, and huge hotels--thy side-walks wide;)	  Thy windows rich, and huge hotels--thy side-walks wide;)
  Thou of the endless sliding, mincing, shuffling feet!	  Thou of the endless sliding, mincing, shuffling feet!	  Thou of the endless sliding, mincing, shuffling feet!	  Thou of the endless sliding, mincing, shuffling feet!
  Thou, like the parti-colored world itself--like infinite, teeming,	  Thou, like the parti-colored world itself--like infinite, teeming,	  Thou, like the parti-colored world itself--like infinite, teeming,	  Thou, like the parti-colored world itself--like infinite, teeming,
      mocking life!	      mocking life!	      mocking life!	      mocking life!
  Thou visor'd, vast, unspeakable show and lesson!	  Thou visor'd, vast, unspeakable show and lesson!	  Thou visor'd, vast, unspeakable show and lesson!	  Thou visor'd, vast, unspeakable show and lesson!
			
			
			
			
To Get the Final Lilt of Songs	To Get the Final Lilt of Songs	To Get the Final Lilt of Songs	To Get the Final Lilt of Songs
			
  To get the final lilt of songs,	  To get the final lilt of songs,	  To get the final lilt of songs,	  To get the final lilt of songs,
  To penetrate the inmost lore of poets--to know the mighty ones,	  To penetrate the inmost lore of poets--to know the mighty ones,	  To penetrate the inmost lore of poets--to know the mighty ones,	  To penetrate the inmost lore of poets--to know the mighty ones,
  Job, Homer, Eschylus, Dante, Shakespere, Tennyson, Emerson;	  Job, Homer, Eschylus, Dante, Shakespere, Tennyson, Emerson;	  Job, Homer, Eschylus, Dante, Shakespere, Tennyson, Emerson;	  Job, Homer, Eschylus, Dante, Shakespere, Tennyson, Emerson;
  To diagnose the shifting-delicate tints of love and pride and doubt--	  To diagnose the shifting-delicate tints of love and pride and doubt--	  To diagnose the shifting-delicate tints of love and pride and doubt--	  To diagnose the shifting-delicate tints of love and pride and doubt--
      to truly understand,	      to truly understand,	      to truly understand,	      to truly understand,
  To encompass these, the last keen faculty and entrance-price,	  To encompass these, the last keen faculty and entrance-price,	  To encompass these, the last keen faculty and entrance-price,	  To encompass these, the last keen faculty and entrance-price,
  Old age, and what it brings from all its past experiences.	  Old age, and what it brings from all its past experiences.	  Old age, and what it brings from all its past experiences.	  Old age, and what it brings from all its past experiences.
			
			
			
			
Old Salt Kossabone	Old Salt Kossabone	Old Salt Kossabone	Old Salt Kossabone
			
  Far back, related on my mother's side,	  Far back, related on my mother's side,	  Far back, related on my mother's side,	  Far back, related on my mother's side,
  Old Salt Kossabone, I'll tell you how he died:	  Old Salt Kossabone, I'll tell you how he died:	  Old Salt Kossabone, I'll tell you how he died:	  Old Salt Kossabone, I'll tell you how he died:
  (Had been a sailor all his life--was nearly 90--lived with his	  (Had been a sailor all his life--was nearly 90--lived with his	  (Had been a sailor all his life--was nearly 90--lived with his	  (Had been a sailor all his life--was nearly 90--lived with his
      married grandchild, Jenny;	      married grandchild, Jenny;	      married grandchild, Jenny;	      married grandchild, Jenny;
  House on a hill, with view of bay at hand, and distant cape, and	  House on a hill, with view of bay at hand, and distant cape, and	  House on a hill, with view of bay at hand, and distant cape, and	  House on a hill, with view of bay at hand, and distant cape, and
      stretch to open sea;)	      stretch to open sea;)	      stretch to open sea;)	      stretch to open sea;)
  The last of afternoons, the evening hours, for many a year his	  The last of afternoons, the evening hours, for many a year his	  The last of afternoons, the evening hours, for many a year his	  The last of afternoons, the evening hours, for many a year his
      regular custom,	      regular custom,	      regular custom,	      regular custom,
  In his great arm chair by the window seated,	  In his great arm chair by the window seated,	  In his great arm chair by the window seated,	  In his great arm chair by the window seated,
  (Sometimes, indeed, through half the day,)	  (Sometimes, indeed, through half the day,)	  (Sometimes, indeed, through half the day,)	  (Sometimes, indeed, through half the day,)
  Watching the coming, going of the vessels, he mutters to himself--	  Watching the coming, going of the vessels, he mutters to himself--	  Watching the coming, going of the vessels, he mutters to himself--	  Watching the coming, going of the vessels, he mutters to himself--
      And now the close of all:	      And now the close of all:	      And now the close of all:	      And now the close of all:
  One struggling outbound brig, one day, baffled for long--cross-tides	  One struggling outbound brig, one day, baffled for long--cross-tides	  One struggling outbound brig, one day, baffled for long--cross-tides	  One struggling outbound brig, one day, baffled for long--cross-tides
      and much wrong going,	      and much wrong going,	      and much wrong going,	      and much wrong going,
  At last at nightfall strikes the breeze aright, her whole luck veering,	  At last at nightfall strikes the breeze aright, her whole luck veering,	  At last at nightfall strikes the breeze aright, her whole luck veering,	  At last at nightfall strikes the breeze aright, her whole luck veering,
  And swiftly bending round the cape, the darkness proudly entering,	  And swiftly bending round the cape, the darkness proudly entering,	  And swiftly bending round the cape, the darkness proudly entering,	  And swiftly bending round the cape, the darkness proudly entering,
      cleaving, as he watches,	      cleaving, as he watches,	      cleaving, as he watches,	      cleaving, as he watches,
  "She's free--she's on her destination"--these the last words--when	  "She's free--she's on her destination"--these the last words--when	  "She's free--she's on her destination"--these the last words--when	  "She's free--she's on her destination"--these the last words--when
      Jenny came, he sat there dead,	      Jenny came, he sat there dead,	      Jenny came, he sat there dead,	      Jenny came, he sat there dead,
  Dutch Kossabone, Old Salt, related on my mother's side, far back.	  Dutch Kossabone, Old Salt, related on my mother's side, far back.	  Dutch Kossabone, Old Salt, related on my mother's side, far back.	  Dutch Kossabone, Old Salt, related on my mother's side, far back.
			
			
			
			
The Dead Tenor	The Dead Tenor	The Dead Tenor	The Dead Tenor
			
  As down the stage again,	  As down the stage again,	  As down the stage again,	  As down the stage again,
  With Spanish hat and plumes, and gait inimitable,	  With Spanish hat and plumes, and gait inimitable,	  With Spanish hat and plumes, and gait inimitable,	  With Spanish hat and plumes, and gait inimitable,
  Back from the fading lessons of the past, I'd call, I'd tell and own,	  Back from the fading lessons of the past, I'd call, I'd tell and own,	  Back from the fading lessons of the past, I'd call, I'd tell and own,	  Back from the fading lessons of the past, I'd call, I'd tell and own,
  How much from thee! the revelation of the singing voice from thee!	  How much from thee! the revelation of the singing voice from thee!	  How much from thee! the revelation of the singing voice from thee!	  How much from thee! the revelation of the singing voice from thee!
  (So firm--so liquid-soft--again that tremulous, manly timbre!	  (So firm--so liquid-soft--again that tremulous, manly timbre!	  (So firm--so liquid-soft--again that tremulous, manly timbre!	  (So firm--so liquid-soft--again that tremulous, manly timbre!
  The perfect singing voice--deepest of all to me the lesson--trial	  The perfect singing voice--deepest of all to me the lesson--trial	  The perfect singing voice--deepest of all to me the lesson--trial	  The perfect singing voice--deepest of all to me the lesson--trial
      and test of all:)	      and test of all:)	      and test of all:)	      and test of all:)
  How through those strains distill'd--how the rapt ears, the soul of	  How through those strains distill'd--how the rapt ears, the soul of	  How through those strains distill'd--how the rapt ears, the soul of	  How through those strains distill'd--how the rapt ears, the soul of
      me, absorbing	      me, absorbing	      me, absorbing	      me, absorbing
  Fernando's heart, Manrico's passionate call, Ernani's, sweet Gennaro's,	  Fernando's heart, Manrico's passionate call, Ernani's, sweet Gennaro's,	  Fernando's heart, Manrico's passionate call, Ernani's, sweet Gennaro's,	  Fernando's heart, Manrico's passionate call, Ernani's, sweet Gennaro's,
  I fold thenceforth, or seek to fold, within my chants transmuting,	  I fold thenceforth, or seek to fold, within my chants transmuting,	  I fold thenceforth, or seek to fold, within my chants transmuting,	  I fold thenceforth, or seek to fold, within my chants transmuting,
  Freedom's and Love's and Faith's unloos'd cantabile,	  Freedom's and Love's and Faith's unloos'd cantabile,	  Freedom's and Love's and Faith's unloos'd cantabile,	  Freedom's and Love's and Faith's unloos'd cantabile,
  (As perfume's, color's, sunlight's correlation:)	  (As perfume's, color's, sunlight's correlation:)	  (As perfume's, color's, sunlight's correlation:)	  (As perfume's, color's, sunlight's correlation:)
  From these, for these, with these, a hurried line, dead tenor,	  From these, for these, with these, a hurried line, dead tenor,	  From these, for these, with these, a hurried line, dead tenor,	  From these, for these, with these, a hurried line, dead tenor,
  A wafted autumn leaf, dropt in the closing grave, the shovel'd earth,	  A wafted autumn leaf, dropt in the closing grave, the shovel'd earth,	  A wafted autumn leaf, dropt in the closing grave, the shovel'd earth,	  A wafted autumn leaf, dropt in the closing grave, the shovel'd earth,
  To memory of thee.	  To memory of thee.	  To memory of thee.	  To memory of thee.
			
			
			
			
Continuities	Continuities	Continuities	Continuities
			
  Nothing is ever really lost, or can be lost,	  Nothing is ever really lost, or can be lost,	  Nothing is ever really lost, or can be lost,	  Nothing is ever really lost, or can be lost,
  No birth, identity, form--no object of the world.	  No birth, identity, form--no object of the world.	  No birth, identity, form--no object of the world.	  No birth, identity, form--no object of the world.
  Nor life, nor force, nor any visible thing;	  Nor life, nor force, nor any visible thing;	  Nor life, nor force, nor any visible thing;	  Nor life, nor force, nor any visible thing;
  Appearance must not foil, nor shifted sphere confuse thy brain.	  Appearance must not foil, nor shifted sphere confuse thy brain.	  Appearance must not foil, nor shifted sphere confuse thy brain.	  Appearance must not foil, nor shifted sphere confuse thy brain.
  Ample are time and space--ample the fields of Nature.	  Ample are time and space--ample the fields of Nature.	  Ample are time and space--ample the fields of Nature.	  Ample are time and space--ample the fields of Nature.
  The body, sluggish, aged, cold--the embers left from earlier fires,	  The body, sluggish, aged, cold--the embers left from earlier fires,	  The body, sluggish, aged, cold--the embers left from earlier fires,	  The body, sluggish, aged, cold--the embers left from earlier fires,
  The light in the eye grown dim, shall duly flame again;	  The light in the eye grown dim, shall duly flame again;	  The light in the eye grown dim, shall duly flame again;	  The light in the eye grown dim, shall duly flame again;
  The sun now low in the west rises for mornings and for noons continual;	  The sun now low in the west rises for mornings and for noons continual;	  The sun now low in the west rises for mornings and for noons continual;	  The sun now low in the west rises for mornings and for noons continual;
  To frozen clods ever the spring's invisible law returns,	  To frozen clods ever the spring's invisible law returns,	  To frozen clods ever the spring's invisible law returns,	  To frozen clods ever the spring's invisible law returns,
  With grass and flowers and summer fruits and corn.	  With grass and flowers and summer fruits and corn.	  With grass and flowers and summer fruits and corn.	  With grass and flowers and summer fruits and corn.
			
			
			
			
Yonnondio	Yonnondio	Yonnondio	Yonnondio
			
  A song, a poem of itself--the word itself a dirge,	  A song, a poem of itself--the word itself a dirge,	  A song, a poem of itself--the word itself a dirge,	  A song, a poem of itself--the word itself a dirge,
  Amid the wilds, the rocks, the storm and wintry night,	  Amid the wilds, the rocks, the storm and wintry night,	  Amid the wilds, the rocks, the storm and wintry night,	  Amid the wilds, the rocks, the storm and wintry night,
  To me such misty, strange tableaux the syllables calling up;	  To me such misty, strange tableaux the syllables calling up;	  To me such misty, strange tableaux the syllables calling up;	  To me such misty, strange tableaux the syllables calling up;
  Yonnondio--I see, far in the west or north, a limitless ravine, with	  Yonnondio--I see, far in the west or north, a limitless ravine, with	  Yonnondio--I see, far in the west or north, a limitless ravine, with	  Yonnondio--I see, far in the west or north, a limitless ravine, with
      plains and mountains dark,	      plains and mountains dark,	      plains and mountains dark,	      plains and mountains dark,
  I see swarms of stalwart chieftains, medicine-men, and warriors,	  I see swarms of stalwart chieftains, medicine-men, and warriors,	  I see swarms of stalwart chieftains, medicine-men, and warriors,	  I see swarms of stalwart chieftains, medicine-men, and warriors,
  As flitting by like clouds of ghosts, they pass and are gone in the	  As flitting by like clouds of ghosts, they pass and are gone in the	  As flitting by like clouds of ghosts, they pass and are gone in the	  As flitting by like clouds of ghosts, they pass and are gone in the
      twilight,	      twilight,	      twilight,	      twilight,
  (Race of the woods, the landscapes free, and the falls!	  (Race of the woods, the landscapes free, and the falls!	  (Race of the woods, the landscapes free, and the falls!	  (Race of the woods, the landscapes free, and the falls!
  No picture, poem, statement, passing them to the future:)	  No picture, poem, statement, passing them to the future:)	  No picture, poem, statement, passing them to the future:)	  No picture, poem, statement, passing them to the future:)
  Yonnondio! Yonnondio!--unlimn'd they disappear;	  Yonnondio! Yonnondio!--unlimn'd they disappear;	  Yonnondio! Yonnondio!--unlimn'd they disappear;	  Yonnondio! Yonnondio!--unlimn'd they disappear;
  To-day gives place, and fades--the cities, farms, factories fade;	  To-day gives place, and fades--the cities, farms, factories fade;	  To-day gives place, and fades--the cities, farms, factories fade;	  To-day gives place, and fades--the cities, farms, factories fade;
  A muffled sonorous sound, a wailing word is borne through the air	  A muffled sonorous sound, a wailing word is borne through the air	  A muffled sonorous sound, a wailing word is borne through the air	  A muffled sonorous sound, a wailing word is borne through the air
      for a moment,	      for a moment,	      for a moment,	      for a moment,
  Then blank and gone and still, and utterly lost.	  Then blank and gone and still, and utterly lost.	  Then blank and gone and still, and utterly lost.	  Then blank and gone and still, and utterly lost.
			
			
			
			
Life	Life	Life	Life
			
  Ever the undiscouraged, resolute, struggling soul of man;	  Ever the undiscouraged, resolute, struggling soul of man;	  Ever the undiscouraged, resolute, struggling soul of man;	  Ever the undiscouraged, resolute, struggling soul of man;
  (Have former armies fail'd? then we send fresh armies--and fresh again;)	  (Have former armies fail'd? then we send fresh armies--and fresh again;)	  (Have former armies fail'd? then we send fresh armies--and fresh again;)	  (Have former armies fail'd? then we send fresh armies--and fresh again;)
  Ever the grappled mystery of all earth's ages old or new;	  Ever the grappled mystery of all earth's ages old or new;	  Ever the grappled mystery of all earth's ages old or new;	  Ever the grappled mystery of all earth's ages old or new;
  Ever the eager eyes, hurrahs, the welcome-clapping hands, the loud	  Ever the eager eyes, hurrahs, the welcome-clapping hands, the loud	  Ever the eager eyes, hurrahs, the welcome-clapping hands, the loud	  Ever the eager eyes, hurrahs, the welcome-clapping hands, the loud
      applause;	      applause;	      applause;	      applause;
  Ever the soul dissatisfied, curious, unconvinced at last;	  Ever the soul dissatisfied, curious, unconvinced at last;	  Ever the soul dissatisfied, curious, unconvinced at last;	  Ever the soul dissatisfied, curious, unconvinced at last;
  Struggling to-day the same--battling the same.	  Struggling to-day the same--battling the same.	  Struggling to-day the same--battling the same.	  Struggling to-day the same--battling the same.
			
			
			
			
"Going Somewhere"	"Going Somewhere"	"Going Somewhere"	"Going Somewhere"
			
  My science-friend, my noblest woman-friend,	  My science-friend, my noblest woman-friend,	  My science-friend, my noblest woman-friend,	  My science-friend, my noblest woman-friend,
  (Now buried in an English grave--and this a memory-leaf for her dear sake,)	  (Now buried in an English grave--and this a memory-leaf for her dear sake,)	  (Now buried in an English grave--and this a memory-leaf for her dear sake,)	  (Now buried in an English grave--and this a memory-leaf for her dear sake,)
  Ended our talk--"The sum, concluding all we know of old or modern	  Ended our talk--"The sum, concluding all we know of old or modern	  Ended our talk--"The sum, concluding all we know of old or modern	  Ended our talk--"The sum, concluding all we know of old or modern
      learning, intuitions deep,	      learning, intuitions deep,	      learning, intuitions deep,	      learning, intuitions deep,
  "Of all Geologies--Histories--of all Astronomy--of Evolution,	  "Of all Geologies--Histories--of all Astronomy--of Evolution,	  "Of all Geologies--Histories--of all Astronomy--of Evolution,	  "Of all Geologies--Histories--of all Astronomy--of Evolution,
      Metaphysics all,	      Metaphysics all,	      Metaphysics all,	      Metaphysics all,
  "Is, that we all are onward, onward, speeding slowly, surely bettering,	  "Is, that we all are onward, onward, speeding slowly, surely bettering,	  "Is, that we all are onward, onward, speeding slowly, surely bettering,	  "Is, that we all are onward, onward, speeding slowly, surely bettering,
  "Life, life an endless march, an endless army, (no halt, but it is	  "Life, life an endless march, an endless army, (no halt, but it is	  "Life, life an endless march, an endless army, (no halt, but it is	  "Life, life an endless march, an endless army, (no halt, but it is
      duly over,)	      duly over,)	      duly over,)	      duly over,)
  "The world, the race, the soul--in space and time the universes,	  "The world, the race, the soul--in space and time the universes,	  "The world, the race, the soul--in space and time the universes,	  "The world, the race, the soul--in space and time the universes,
  "All bound as is befitting each--all surely going somewhere."	  "All bound as is befitting each--all surely going somewhere."	  "All bound as is befitting each--all surely going somewhere."	  "All bound as is befitting each--all surely going somewhere."
			
			
			
			
Small the Theme of My Chant	Small the Theme of My Chant	Small the Theme of My Chant	Small the Theme of My Chant
			
  Small the theme of my Chant, yet the greatest--namely, One's-Self--	  Small the theme of my Chant, yet the greatest--namely, One's-Self--	  Small the theme of my Chant, yet the greatest--namely, One's-Self--	  Small the theme of my Chant, yet the greatest--namely, One's-Self--
      a simple, separate person. That, for the use of the New World, I sing.	      a simple, separate person. That, for the use of the New World, I sing.	      a simple, separate person. That, for the use of the New World, I sing.	      a simple, separate person. That, for the use of the New World, I sing.
  Man's physiology complete, from top to toe, I sing. Not physiognomy alone,	  Man's physiology complete, from top to toe, I sing. Not physiognomy alone,	  Man's physiology complete, from top to toe, I sing. Not physiognomy alone,	  Man's physiology complete, from top to toe, I sing. Not physiognomy alone,
      nor brain alone, is worthy for the Muse;--I say the Form complete	      nor brain alone, is worthy for the Muse;--I say the Form complete	      nor brain alone, is worthy for the Muse;--I say the Form complete	      nor brain alone, is worthy for the Muse;--I say the Form complete
      is worthier far. The Female equally with the Male, I sing.	      is worthier far. The Female equally with the Male, I sing.	      is worthier far. The Female equally with the Male, I sing.	      is worthier far. The Female equally with the Male, I sing.
  Nor cease at the theme of One's-Self. I speak the word of the	  Nor cease at the theme of One's-Self. I speak the word of the	  Nor cease at the theme of One's-Self. I speak the word of the	  Nor cease at the theme of One's-Self. I speak the word of the
      modern, the word En-Masse.	      modern, the word En-Masse.	      modern, the word En-Masse.	      modern, the word En-Masse.
  My Days I sing, and the Lands--with interstice I knew of hapless War.	  My Days I sing, and the Lands--with interstice I knew of hapless War.	  My Days I sing, and the Lands--with interstice I knew of hapless War.	  My Days I sing, and the Lands--with interstice I knew of hapless War.
  (O friend, whoe'er you are, at last arriving hither to commence, I	  (O friend, whoe'er you are, at last arriving hither to commence, I	  (O friend, whoe'er you are, at last arriving hither to commence, I	  (O friend, whoe'er you are, at last arriving hither to commence, I
      feel through every leaf the pressure of your hand, which I return.	      feel through every leaf the pressure of your hand, which I return.	      feel through every leaf the pressure of your hand, which I return.	      feel through every leaf the pressure of your hand, which I return.
  And thus upon our journey, footing the road, and more than once, and	  And thus upon our journey, footing the road, and more than once, and	  And thus upon our journey, footing the road, and more than once, and	  And thus upon our journey, footing the road, and more than once, and
      link'd together let us go.)	      link'd together let us go.)	      link'd together let us go.)	      link'd together let us go.)
			
			
			
			
True Conquerors	True Conquerors	True Conquerors	True Conquerors
			
  Old farmers, travelers, workmen (no matter how crippled or bent,)	  Old farmers, travelers, workmen (no matter how crippled or bent,)	  Old farmers, travelers, workmen (no matter how crippled or bent,)	  Old farmers, travelers, workmen (no matter how crippled or bent,)
  Old sailors, out of many a perilous voyage, storm and wreck,	  Old sailors, out of many a perilous voyage, storm and wreck,	  Old sailors, out of many a perilous voyage, storm and wreck,	  Old sailors, out of many a perilous voyage, storm and wreck,
  Old soldiers from campaigns, with all their wounds, defeats and scars;	  Old soldiers from campaigns, with all their wounds, defeats and scars;	  Old soldiers from campaigns, with all their wounds, defeats and scars;	  Old soldiers from campaigns, with all their wounds, defeats and scars;
  Enough that they've survived at all--long life's unflinching ones!	  Enough that they've survived at all--long life's unflinching ones!	  Enough that they've survived at all--long life's unflinching ones!	  Enough that they've survived at all--long life's unflinching ones!
  Forth from their struggles, trials, fights, to have emerged at all--	  Forth from their struggles, trials, fights, to have emerged at all--	  Forth from their struggles, trials, fights, to have emerged at all--	  Forth from their struggles, trials, fights, to have emerged at all--
      in that alone,	      in that alone,	      in that alone,	      in that alone,
  True conquerors o'er all the rest.	  True conquerors o'er all the rest.	  True conquerors o'er all the rest.	  True conquerors o'er all the rest.
			
			
			
			
The United States to Old World Critics	The United States to Old World Critics	The United States to Old World Critics	The United States to Old World Critics
			
  Here first the duties of to-day, the lessons of the concrete,	  Here first the duties of to-day, the lessons of the concrete,	  Here first the duties of to-day, the lessons of the concrete,	  Here first the duties of to-day, the lessons of the concrete,
  Wealth, order, travel, shelter, products, plenty;	  Wealth, order, travel, shelter, products, plenty;	  Wealth, order, travel, shelter, products, plenty;	  Wealth, order, travel, shelter, products, plenty;
  As of the building of some varied, vast, perpetual edifice,	  As of the building of some varied, vast, perpetual edifice,	  As of the building of some varied, vast, perpetual edifice,	  As of the building of some varied, vast, perpetual edifice,
  Whence to arise inevitable in time, the towering roofs, the lamps,	  Whence to arise inevitable in time, the towering roofs, the lamps,	  Whence to arise inevitable in time, the towering roofs, the lamps,	  Whence to arise inevitable in time, the towering roofs, the lamps,
  The solid-planted spires tall shooting to the stars.	  The solid-planted spires tall shooting to the stars.	  The solid-planted spires tall shooting to the stars.	  The solid-planted spires tall shooting to the stars.
			
			
			
			
The Calming Thought of All	The Calming Thought of All	The Calming Thought of All	The Calming Thought of All
			
  That coursing on, whate'er men's speculations,	  That coursing on, whate'er men's speculations,	  That coursing on, whate'er men's speculations,	  That coursing on, whate'er men's speculations,
  Amid the changing schools, theologies, philosophies,	  Amid the changing schools, theologies, philosophies,	  Amid the changing schools, theologies, philosophies,	  Amid the changing schools, theologies, philosophies,
  Amid the bawling presentations new and old,	  Amid the bawling presentations new and old,	  Amid the bawling presentations new and old,	  Amid the bawling presentations new and old,
  The round earth's silent vital laws, facts, modes continue.	  The round earth's silent vital laws, facts, modes continue.	  The round earth's silent vital laws, facts, modes continue.	  The round earth's silent vital laws, facts, modes continue.
			
			
			
			
Thanks in Old Age	Thanks in Old Age	Thanks in Old Age	Thanks in Old Age
			
  Thanks in old age--thanks ere I go,	  Thanks in old age--thanks ere I go,	  Thanks in old age--thanks ere I go,	  Thanks in old age--thanks ere I go,
  For health, the midday sun, the impalpable air--for life, mere life,	  For health, the midday sun, the impalpable air--for life, mere life,	  For health, the midday sun, the impalpable air--for life, mere life,	  For health, the midday sun, the impalpable air--for life, mere life,
  For precious ever-lingering memories, (of you my mother dear--you,	  For precious ever-lingering memories, (of you my mother dear--you,	  For precious ever-lingering memories, (of you my mother dear--you,	  For precious ever-lingering memories, (of you my mother dear--you,
      father--you, brothers, sisters, friends,)	      father--you, brothers, sisters, friends,)	      father--you, brothers, sisters, friends,)	      father--you, brothers, sisters, friends,)
  For all my days--not those of peace alone--the days of war the same,	  For all my days--not those of peace alone--the days of war the same,	  For all my days--not those of peace alone--the days of war the same,	  For all my days--not those of peace alone--the days of war the same,
  For gentle words, caresses, gifts from foreign lands,	  For gentle words, caresses, gifts from foreign lands,	  For gentle words, caresses, gifts from foreign lands,	  For gentle words, caresses, gifts from foreign lands,
  For shelter, wine and meat--for sweet appreciation,	  For shelter, wine and meat--for sweet appreciation,	  For shelter, wine and meat--for sweet appreciation,	  For shelter, wine and meat--for sweet appreciation,
  (You distant, dim unknown--or young or old--countless, unspecified,	  (You distant, dim unknown--or young or old--countless, unspecified,	  (You distant, dim unknown--or young or old--countless, unspecified,	  (You distant, dim unknown--or young or old--countless, unspecified,
      readers belov'd,	      readers belov'd,	      readers belov'd,	      readers belov'd,
  We never met, and neer shall meet--and yet our souls embrace, long,	  We never met, and neer shall meet--and yet our souls embrace, long,	  We never met, and neer shall meet--and yet our souls embrace, long,	  We never met, and neer shall meet--and yet our souls embrace, long,
      close and long;)	      close and long;)	      close and long;)	      close and long;)
  For beings, groups, love, deeds, words, books--for colors, forms,	  For beings, groups, love, deeds, words, books--for colors, forms,	  For beings, groups, love, deeds, words, books--for colors, forms,	  For beings, groups, love, deeds, words, books--for colors, forms,
  For all the brave strong men--devoted, hardy men--who've forward	  For all the brave strong men--devoted, hardy men--who've forward	  For all the brave strong men--devoted, hardy men--who've forward	  For all the brave strong men--devoted, hardy men--who've forward
      sprung in freedom's help, all years, all lands	      sprung in freedom's help, all years, all lands	      sprung in freedom's help, all years, all lands	      sprung in freedom's help, all years, all lands
  For braver, stronger, more devoted men--(a special laurel ere I go,	  For braver, stronger, more devoted men--(a special laurel ere I go,	  For braver, stronger, more devoted men--(a special laurel ere I go,	  For braver, stronger, more devoted men--(a special laurel ere I go,
      to life's war's chosen ones,	      to life's war's chosen ones,	      to life's war's chosen ones,	      to life's war's chosen ones,
  The cannoneers of song and thought--the great artillerists--the	  The cannoneers of song and thought--the great artillerists--the	  The cannoneers of song and thought--the great artillerists--the	  The cannoneers of song and thought--the great artillerists--the
      foremost leaders, captains of the soul:)	      foremost leaders, captains of the soul:)	      foremost leaders, captains of the soul:)	      foremost leaders, captains of the soul:)
  As soldier from an ended war return'd--As traveler out of myriads,	  As soldier from an ended war return'd--As traveler out of myriads,	  As soldier from an ended war return'd--As traveler out of myriads,	  As soldier from an ended war return'd--As traveler out of myriads,
      to the long procession retrospective,	      to the long procession retrospective,	      to the long procession retrospective,	      to the long procession retrospective,
  Thanks--joyful thanks!--a soldier's, traveler's thanks.	  Thanks--joyful thanks!--a soldier's, traveler's thanks.	  Thanks--joyful thanks!--a soldier's, traveler's thanks.	  Thanks--joyful thanks!--a soldier's, traveler's thanks.
			
			
			
			
Life and Death	Life and Death	Life and Death	Life and Death
			
  The two old, simple problems ever intertwined,	  The two old, simple problems ever intertwined,	  The two old, simple problems ever intertwined,	  The two old, simple problems ever intertwined,
  Close home, elusive, present, baffled, grappled.	  Close home, elusive, present, baffled, grappled.	  Close home, elusive, present, baffled, grappled.	  Close home, elusive, present, baffled, grappled.
  By each successive age insoluble, pass'd on,	  By each successive age insoluble, pass'd on,	  By each successive age insoluble, pass'd on,	  By each successive age insoluble, pass'd on,
  To ours to-day--and we pass on the same.	  To ours to-day--and we pass on the same.	  To ours to-day--and we pass on the same.	  To ours to-day--and we pass on the same.
			
			
			
			
The Voice of the Rain	The Voice of the Rain	The Voice of the Rain	The Voice of the Rain
			
  And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower,	  And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower,	  And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower,	  And who art thou? said I to the soft-falling shower,
  Which, strange to tell, gave me an answer, as here translated:	  Which, strange to tell, gave me an answer, as here translated:	  Which, strange to tell, gave me an answer, as here translated:	  Which, strange to tell, gave me an answer, as here translated:
  I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain,	  I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain,	  I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain,	  I am the Poem of Earth, said the voice of the rain,
  Eternal I rise impalpable out of the land and the bottomless sea,	  Eternal I rise impalpable out of the land and the bottomless sea,	  Eternal I rise impalpable out of the land and the bottomless sea,	  Eternal I rise impalpable out of the land and the bottomless sea,
  Upward to heaven, whence, vaguely form'd, altogether changed, and	  Upward to heaven, whence, vaguely form'd, altogether changed, and	  Upward to heaven, whence, vaguely form'd, altogether changed, and	  Upward to heaven, whence, vaguely form'd, altogether changed, and
      yet the same,	      yet the same,	      yet the same,	      yet the same,
  I descend to lave the drouths, atomies, dust-layers of the globe,	  I descend to lave the drouths, atomies, dust-layers of the globe,	  I descend to lave the drouths, atomies, dust-layers of the globe,	  I descend to lave the drouths, atomies, dust-layers of the globe,
  And all that in them without me were seeds only, latent, unborn;	  And all that in them without me were seeds only, latent, unborn;	  And all that in them without me were seeds only, latent, unborn;	  And all that in them without me were seeds only, latent, unborn;
  And forever, by day and night, I give back life to my own origin,	  And forever, by day and night, I give back life to my own origin,	  And forever, by day and night, I give back life to my own origin,	  And forever, by day and night, I give back life to my own origin,
      and make pure and beautify it;	      and make pure and beautify it;	      and make pure and beautify it;	      and make pure and beautify it;
  (For song, issuing from its birth-place, after fulfilment, wandering,	  (For song, issuing from its birth-place, after fulfilment, wandering,	  (For song, issuing from its birth-place, after fulfilment, wandering,	  (For song, issuing from its birth-place, after fulfilment, wandering,
  Reck'd or unreck'd, duly with love returns.)	  Reck'd or unreck'd, duly with love returns.)	  Reck'd or unreck'd, duly with love returns.)	  Reck'd or unreck'd, duly with love returns.)
			
			
			
			
Soon Shall the Winter's Foil Be Here	Soon Shall the Winter's Foil Be Here	Soon Shall the Winter's Foil Be Here	Soon Shall the Winter's Foil Be Here
			
  Soon shall the winter's foil be here;	  Soon shall the winter's foil be here;	  Soon shall the winter's foil be here;	  Soon shall the winter's foil be here;
  Soon shall these icy ligatures unbind and melt--A little while,	  Soon shall these icy ligatures unbind and melt--A little while,	  Soon shall these icy ligatures unbind and melt--A little while,	  Soon shall these icy ligatures unbind and melt--A little while,
  And air, soil, wave, suffused shall be in softness, bloom and	  And air, soil, wave, suffused shall be in softness, bloom and	  And air, soil, wave, suffused shall be in softness, bloom and	  And air, soil, wave, suffused shall be in softness, bloom and
      growth--a thousand forms shall rise	      growth--a thousand forms shall rise	      growth--a thousand forms shall rise	      growth--a thousand forms shall rise
  From these dead clods and chills as from low burial graves.	  From these dead clods and chills as from low burial graves.	  From these dead clods and chills as from low burial graves.	  From these dead clods and chills as from low burial graves.
			
  Thine eyes, ears--all thy best attributes--all that takes cognizance	  Thine eyes, ears--all thy best attributes--all that takes cognizance	  Thine eyes, ears--all thy best attributes--all that takes cognizance	  Thine eyes, ears--all thy best attributes--all that takes cognizance
      of natural beauty,	      of natural beauty,	      of natural beauty,	      of natural beauty,
  Shall wake and fill. Thou shalt perceive the simple shows, the	  Shall wake and fill. Thou shalt perceive the simple shows, the	  Shall wake and fill. Thou shalt perceive the simple shows, the	  Shall wake and fill. Thou shalt perceive the simple shows, the
      delicate miracles of earth,	      delicate miracles of earth,	      delicate miracles of earth,	      delicate miracles of earth,
  Dandelions, clover, the emerald grass, the early scents and flowers,	  Dandelions, clover, the emerald grass, the early scents and flowers,	  Dandelions, clover, the emerald grass, the early scents and flowers,	  Dandelions, clover, the emerald grass, the early scents and flowers,
  The arbutus under foot, the willow's yellow-green, the blossoming	  The arbutus under foot, the willow's yellow-green, the blossoming	  The arbutus under foot, the willow's yellow-green, the blossoming	  The arbutus under foot, the willow's yellow-green, the blossoming
      plum and cherry;	      plum and cherry;	      plum and cherry;	      plum and cherry;
  With these the robin, lark and thrush, singing their songs--the	  With these the robin, lark and thrush, singing their songs--the	  With these the robin, lark and thrush, singing their songs--the	  With these the robin, lark and thrush, singing their songs--the
      flitting bluebird;	      flitting bluebird;	      flitting bluebird;	      flitting bluebird;
  For such the scenes the annual play brings on.	  For such the scenes the annual play brings on.	  For such the scenes the annual play brings on.	  For such the scenes the annual play brings on.
			
			
			
			
While Not the Past Forgetting	While Not the Past Forgetting	While Not the Past Forgetting	While Not the Past Forgetting
			
  While not the past forgetting,	  While not the past forgetting,	  While not the past forgetting,	  While not the past forgetting,
  To-day, at least, contention sunk entire--peace, brotherhood uprisen;	  To-day, at least, contention sunk entire--peace, brotherhood uprisen;	  To-day, at least, contention sunk entire--peace, brotherhood uprisen;	  To-day, at least, contention sunk entire--peace, brotherhood uprisen;
  For sign reciprocal our Northern, Southern hands,	  For sign reciprocal our Northern, Southern hands,	  For sign reciprocal our Northern, Southern hands,	  For sign reciprocal our Northern, Southern hands,
  Lay on the graves of all dead soldiers, North or South,	  Lay on the graves of all dead soldiers, North or South,	  Lay on the graves of all dead soldiers, North or South,	  Lay on the graves of all dead soldiers, North or South,
  (Nor for the past alone--for meanings to the future,)	  (Nor for the past alone--for meanings to the future,)	  (Nor for the past alone--for meanings to the future,)	  (Nor for the past alone--for meanings to the future,)
  Wreaths of roses and branches of palm.	  Wreaths of roses and branches of palm.	  Wreaths of roses and branches of palm.	  Wreaths of roses and branches of palm.
			
			
			
			
The Dying Veteran	The Dying Veteran	The Dying Veteran	The Dying Veteran
			
  Amid these days of order, ease, prosperity,	  Amid these days of order, ease, prosperity,	  Amid these days of order, ease, prosperity,	  Amid these days of order, ease, prosperity,
  Amid the current songs of beauty, peace, decorum,	  Amid the current songs of beauty, peace, decorum,	  Amid the current songs of beauty, peace, decorum,	  Amid the current songs of beauty, peace, decorum,
  I cast a reminiscence--(likely 'twill offend you,	  I cast a reminiscence--(likely 'twill offend you,	  I cast a reminiscence--(likely 'twill offend you,	  I cast a reminiscence--(likely 'twill offend you,
  I heard it in my boyhood;)--More than a generation since,	  I heard it in my boyhood;)--More than a generation since,	  I heard it in my boyhood;)--More than a generation since,	  I heard it in my boyhood;)--More than a generation since,
  A queer old savage man, a fighter under Washington himself,	  A queer old savage man, a fighter under Washington himself,	  A queer old savage man, a fighter under Washington himself,	  A queer old savage man, a fighter under Washington himself,
  (Large, brave, cleanly, hot-blooded, no talker, rather spiritualistic,	  (Large, brave, cleanly, hot-blooded, no talker, rather spiritualistic,	  (Large, brave, cleanly, hot-blooded, no talker, rather spiritualistic,	  (Large, brave, cleanly, hot-blooded, no talker, rather spiritualistic,
  Had fought in the ranks--fought well--had been all through the	  Had fought in the ranks--fought well--had been all through the	  Had fought in the ranks--fought well--had been all through the	  Had fought in the ranks--fought well--had been all through the
      Revolutionary war,)	      Revolutionary war,)	      Revolutionary war,)	      Revolutionary war,)
  Lay dying--sons, daughters, church-deacons, lovingly tending him,	  Lay dying--sons, daughters, church-deacons, lovingly tending him,	  Lay dying--sons, daughters, church-deacons, lovingly tending him,	  Lay dying--sons, daughters, church-deacons, lovingly tending him,
  Sharping their sense, their ears, towards his murmuring, half-caught words:	  Sharping their sense, their ears, towards his murmuring, half-caught words:	  Sharping their sense, their ears, towards his murmuring, half-caught words:	  Sharping their sense, their ears, towards his murmuring, half-caught words:
  "Let me return again to my war-days,	  "Let me return again to my war-days,	  "Let me return again to my war-days,	  "Let me return again to my war-days,
  To the sights and scenes--to forming the line of battle,	  To the sights and scenes--to forming the line of battle,	  To the sights and scenes--to forming the line of battle,	  To the sights and scenes--to forming the line of battle,
  To the scouts ahead reconnoitering,	  To the scouts ahead reconnoitering,	  To the scouts ahead reconnoitering,	  To the scouts ahead reconnoitering,
  To the cannons, the grim artillery,	  To the cannons, the grim artillery,	  To the cannons, the grim artillery,	  To the cannons, the grim artillery,
  To the galloping aides, carrying orders,	  To the galloping aides, carrying orders,	  To the galloping aides, carrying orders,	  To the galloping aides, carrying orders,
  To the wounded, the fallen, the heat, the suspense,	  To the wounded, the fallen, the heat, the suspense,	  To the wounded, the fallen, the heat, the suspense,	  To the wounded, the fallen, the heat, the suspense,
  The perfume strong, the smoke, the deafening noise;	  The perfume strong, the smoke, the deafening noise;	  The perfume strong, the smoke, the deafening noise;	  The perfume strong, the smoke, the deafening noise;
  Away with your life of peace!--your joys of peace!	  Away with your life of peace!--your joys of peace!	  Away with your life of peace!--your joys of peace!	  Away with your life of peace!--your joys of peace!
  Give me my old wild battle-life again!"	  Give me my old wild battle-life again!"	  Give me my old wild battle-life again!"	  Give me my old wild battle-life again!"
			
			
			
			
Stronger Lessons	Stronger Lessons	Stronger Lessons	Stronger Lessons
			
  Have you learn'd lessons only of those who admired you, and were	  Have you learn'd lessons only of those who admired you, and were	  Have you learn'd lessons only of those who admired you, and were	  Have you learn'd lessons only of those who admired you, and were
      tender with you, and stood aside for you?	      tender with you, and stood aside for you?	      tender with you, and stood aside for you?	      tender with you, and stood aside for you?
  Have you not learn'd great lessons from those who reject you, and	  Have you not learn'd great lessons from those who reject you, and	  Have you not learn'd great lessons from those who reject you, and	  Have you not learn'd great lessons from those who reject you, and
      brace themselves against you? or who treat you with contempt,	      brace themselves against you? or who treat you with contempt,	      brace themselves against you? or who treat you with contempt,	      brace themselves against you? or who treat you with contempt,
      or dispute the passage with you?	      or dispute the passage with you?	      or dispute the passage with you?	      or dispute the passage with you?
			
			
			
			
A Prairie Sunset	A Prairie Sunset	A Prairie Sunset	A Prairie Sunset
			
  Shot gold, maroon and violet, dazzling silver, emerald, fawn,	  Shot gold, maroon and violet, dazzling silver, emerald, fawn,	  Shot gold, maroon and violet, dazzling silver, emerald, fawn,	  Shot gold, maroon and violet, dazzling silver, emerald, fawn,
  The earth's whole amplitude and Nature's multiform power consign'd	  The earth's whole amplitude and Nature's multiform power consign'd	  The earth's whole amplitude and Nature's multiform power consign'd	  The earth's whole amplitude and Nature's multiform power consign'd
      for once to colors;	      for once to colors;	      for once to colors;	      for once to colors;
  The light, the general air possess'd by them--colors till now unknown,	  The light, the general air possess'd by them--colors till now unknown,	  The light, the general air possess'd by them--colors till now unknown,	  The light, the general air possess'd by them--colors till now unknown,
  No limit, confine--not the Western sky alone--the high meridian--	  No limit, confine--not the Western sky alone--the high meridian--	  No limit, confine--not the Western sky alone--the high meridian--	  No limit, confine--not the Western sky alone--the high meridian--
      North, South, all,	      North, South, all,	      North, South, all,	      North, South, all,
  Pure luminous color fighting the silent shadows to the last.	  Pure luminous color fighting the silent shadows to the last.	  Pure luminous color fighting the silent shadows to the last.	  Pure luminous color fighting the silent shadows to the last.
			
			
			
			
Twenty Years	Twenty Years	Twenty Years	Twenty Years
			
  Down on the ancient wharf, the sand, I sit, with a new-comer chatting:	  Down on the ancient wharf, the sand, I sit, with a new-comer chatting:	  Down on the ancient wharf, the sand, I sit, with a new-comer chatting:	  Down on the ancient wharf, the sand, I sit, with a new-comer chatting:
  He shipp'd as green-hand boy, and sail'd away, (took some sudden,	  He shipp'd as green-hand boy, and sail'd away, (took some sudden,	  He shipp'd as green-hand boy, and sail'd away, (took some sudden,	  He shipp'd as green-hand boy, and sail'd away, (took some sudden,
      vehement notion;)	      vehement notion;)	      vehement notion;)	      vehement notion;)
  Since, twenty years and more have circled round and round,	  Since, twenty years and more have circled round and round,	  Since, twenty years and more have circled round and round,	  Since, twenty years and more have circled round and round,
  While he the globe was circling round and round, --and now returns:	  While he the globe was circling round and round, --and now returns:	  While he the globe was circling round and round, --and now returns:	  While he the globe was circling round and round, --and now returns:
  How changed the place--all the old land-marks gone--the parents dead;	  How changed the place--all the old land-marks gone--the parents dead;	  How changed the place--all the old land-marks gone--the parents dead;	  How changed the place--all the old land-marks gone--the parents dead;
  (Yes, he comes back to lay in port for good--to settle--has a	  (Yes, he comes back to lay in port for good--to settle--has a	  (Yes, he comes back to lay in port for good--to settle--has a	  (Yes, he comes back to lay in port for good--to settle--has a
      well-fill'd purse--no spot will do but this;)	      well-fill'd purse--no spot will do but this;)	      well-fill'd purse--no spot will do but this;)	      well-fill'd purse--no spot will do but this;)
  The little boat that scull'd him from the sloop, now held in leash I see,	  The little boat that scull'd him from the sloop, now held in leash I see,	  The little boat that scull'd him from the sloop, now held in leash I see,	  The little boat that scull'd him from the sloop, now held in leash I see,
  I hear the slapping waves, the restless keel, the rocking in the sand,	  I hear the slapping waves, the restless keel, the rocking in the sand,	  I hear the slapping waves, the restless keel, the rocking in the sand,	  I hear the slapping waves, the restless keel, the rocking in the sand,
  I see the sailor kit, the canvas bag, the great box bound with brass,	  I see the sailor kit, the canvas bag, the great box bound with brass,	  I see the sailor kit, the canvas bag, the great box bound with brass,	  I see the sailor kit, the canvas bag, the great box bound with brass,
  I scan the face all berry-brown and bearded--the stout-strong frame,	  I scan the face all berry-brown and bearded--the stout-strong frame,	  I scan the face all berry-brown and bearded--the stout-strong frame,	  I scan the face all berry-brown and bearded--the stout-strong frame,
  Dress'd in its russet suit of good Scotch cloth:	  Dress'd in its russet suit of good Scotch cloth:	  Dress'd in its russet suit of good Scotch cloth:	  Dress'd in its russet suit of good Scotch cloth:
  (Then what the told-out story of those twenty years? What of the future?)	  (Then what the told-out story of those twenty years? What of the future?)	  (Then what the told-out story of those twenty years? What of the future?)	  (Then what the told-out story of those twenty years? What of the future?)
			
			
			
			
Orange Buds by Mail from Florida	Orange Buds by Mail from Florida	Orange Buds by Mail from Florida	Orange Buds by Mail from Florida
			
  A lesser proof than old Voltaire's, yet greater,	  A lesser proof than old Voltaire's, yet greater,	  A lesser proof than old Voltaire's, yet greater,	  A lesser proof than old Voltaire's, yet greater,
  Proof of this present time, and thee, thy broad expanse, America,	  Proof of this present time, and thee, thy broad expanse, America,	  Proof of this present time, and thee, thy broad expanse, America,	  Proof of this present time, and thee, thy broad expanse, America,
  To my plain Northern hut, in outside clouds and snow,	  To my plain Northern hut, in outside clouds and snow,	  To my plain Northern hut, in outside clouds and snow,	  To my plain Northern hut, in outside clouds and snow,
  Brought safely for a thousand miles o'er land and tide,	  Brought safely for a thousand miles o'er land and tide,	  Brought safely for a thousand miles o'er land and tide,	  Brought safely for a thousand miles o'er land and tide,
  Some three days since on their own soil live-sprouting,	  Some three days since on their own soil live-sprouting,	  Some three days since on their own soil live-sprouting,	  Some three days since on their own soil live-sprouting,
  Now here their sweetness through my room unfolding,	  Now here their sweetness through my room unfolding,	  Now here their sweetness through my room unfolding,	  Now here their sweetness through my room unfolding,
  A bunch of orange buds by mall from Florida.	  A bunch of orange buds by mall from Florida.	  A bunch of orange buds by mall from Florida.	  A bunch of orange buds by mall from Florida.
			
			
			
			
Twilight	Twilight	Twilight	Twilight
			
  The soft voluptuous opiate shades,	  The soft voluptuous opiate shades,	  The soft voluptuous opiate shades,	  The soft voluptuous opiate shades,
  The sun just gone, the eager light dispell'd--(I too will soon be	  The sun just gone, the eager light dispell'd--(I too will soon be	  The sun just gone, the eager light dispell'd--(I too will soon be	  The sun just gone, the eager light dispell'd--(I too will soon be
      gone, dispell'd,)	      gone, dispell'd,)	      gone, dispell'd,)	      gone, dispell'd,)
  A haze--nirwana--rest and night--oblivion.	  A haze--nirwana--rest and night--oblivion.	  A haze--nirwana--rest and night--oblivion.	  A haze--nirwana--rest and night--oblivion.
			
			
			
			
You Lingering Sparse Leaves of Me	You Lingering Sparse Leaves of Me	You Lingering Sparse Leaves of Me	You Lingering Sparse Leaves of Me
			
  You lingering sparse leaves of me on winter-nearing boughs,	  You lingering sparse leaves of me on winter-nearing boughs,	  You lingering sparse leaves of me on winter-nearing boughs,	  You lingering sparse leaves of me on winter-nearing boughs,
  And I some well-shorn tree of field or orchard-row;	  And I some well-shorn tree of field or orchard-row;	  And I some well-shorn tree of field or orchard-row;	  And I some well-shorn tree of field or orchard-row;
  You tokens diminute and lorn--(not now the flush of May, or July	  You tokens diminute and lorn--(not now the flush of May, or July	  You tokens diminute and lorn--(not now the flush of May, or July	  You tokens diminute and lorn--(not now the flush of May, or July
      clover-bloom--no grain of August now;)	      clover-bloom--no grain of August now;)	      clover-bloom--no grain of August now;)	      clover-bloom--no grain of August now;)
  You pallid banner-staves--you pennants valueless--you overstay'd of time,	  You pallid banner-staves--you pennants valueless--you overstay'd of time,	  You pallid banner-staves--you pennants valueless--you overstay'd of time,	  You pallid banner-staves--you pennants valueless--you overstay'd of time,
  Yet my soul-dearest leaves confirming all the rest,	  Yet my soul-dearest leaves confirming all the rest,	  Yet my soul-dearest leaves confirming all the rest,	  Yet my soul-dearest leaves confirming all the rest,
  The faithfulest--hardiest--last.	  The faithfulest--hardiest--last.	  The faithfulest--hardiest--last.	  The faithfulest--hardiest--last.
			
			
			
			
Not Meagre, Latent Boughs Alone	Not Meagre, Latent Boughs Alone	Not Meagre, Latent Boughs Alone	Not Meagre, Latent Boughs Alone
			
  Not meagre, latent boughs alone, O songs! (scaly and bare, like	  Not meagre, latent boughs alone, O songs! (scaly and bare, like	  Not meagre, latent boughs alone, O songs! (scaly and bare, like	  Not meagre, latent boughs alone, O songs! (scaly and bare, like
      eagles' talons,)	      eagles' talons,)	      eagles' talons,)	      eagles' talons,)
  But haply for some sunny day (who knows?) some future spring, some	  But haply for some sunny day (who knows?) some future spring, some	  But haply for some sunny day (who knows?) some future spring, some	  But haply for some sunny day (who knows?) some future spring, some
      summer--bursting forth,	      summer--bursting forth,	      summer--bursting forth,	      summer--bursting forth,
  To verdant leaves, or sheltering shade--to nourishing fruit,	  To verdant leaves, or sheltering shade--to nourishing fruit,	  To verdant leaves, or sheltering shade--to nourishing fruit,	  To verdant leaves, or sheltering shade--to nourishing fruit,
  Apples and grapes--the stalwart limbs of trees emerging--the fresh,	  Apples and grapes--the stalwart limbs of trees emerging--the fresh,	  Apples and grapes--the stalwart limbs of trees emerging--the fresh,	  Apples and grapes--the stalwart limbs of trees emerging--the fresh,
      free, open air,	      free, open air,	      free, open air,	      free, open air,
  And love and faith, like scented roses blooming.	  And love and faith, like scented roses blooming.	  And love and faith, like scented roses blooming.	  And love and faith, like scented roses blooming.
			
			
			
			
The Dead Emperor	The Dead Emperor	The Dead Emperor	The Dead Emperor
			
  To-day, with bending head and eyes, thou, too, Columbia,	  To-day, with bending head and eyes, thou, too, Columbia,	  To-day, with bending head and eyes, thou, too, Columbia,	  To-day, with bending head and eyes, thou, too, Columbia,
  Less for the mighty crown laid low in sorrow--less for the Emperor,	  Less for the mighty crown laid low in sorrow--less for the Emperor,	  Less for the mighty crown laid low in sorrow--less for the Emperor,	  Less for the mighty crown laid low in sorrow--less for the Emperor,
  Thy true condolence breathest, sendest out o'er many a salt sea mile,	  Thy true condolence breathest, sendest out o'er many a salt sea mile,	  Thy true condolence breathest, sendest out o'er many a salt sea mile,	  Thy true condolence breathest, sendest out o'er many a salt sea mile,
  Mourning a good old man--a faithful shepherd, patriot.	  Mourning a good old man--a faithful shepherd, patriot.	  Mourning a good old man--a faithful shepherd, patriot.	  Mourning a good old man--a faithful shepherd, patriot.
			
			
			
			
As the Greek's Signal Flame	As the Greek's Signal Flame	As the Greek's Signal Flame	As the Greek's Signal Flame
			
  As the Greek's signal flame, by antique records told,	  As the Greek's signal flame, by antique records told,	  As the Greek's signal flame, by antique records told,	  As the Greek's signal flame, by antique records told,
  Rose from the hill-top, like applause and glory,	  Rose from the hill-top, like applause and glory,	  Rose from the hill-top, like applause and glory,	  Rose from the hill-top, like applause and glory,
  Welcoming in fame some special veteran, hero,	  Welcoming in fame some special veteran, hero,	  Welcoming in fame some special veteran, hero,	  Welcoming in fame some special veteran, hero,
  With rosy tinge reddening the land he'd served,	  With rosy tinge reddening the land he'd served,	  With rosy tinge reddening the land he'd served,	  With rosy tinge reddening the land he'd served,
  So I aloft from Mannahatta's ship-fringed shore,	  So I aloft from Mannahatta's ship-fringed shore,	  So I aloft from Mannahatta's ship-fringed shore,	  So I aloft from Mannahatta's ship-fringed shore,
  Lift high a kindled brand for thee, Old Poet.	  Lift high a kindled brand for thee, Old Poet.	  Lift high a kindled brand for thee, Old Poet.	  Lift high a kindled brand for thee, Old Poet.
			
			
			
			
The Dismantled Ship	The Dismantled Ship	The Dismantled Ship	The Dismantled Ship
			
  In some unused lagoon, some nameless bay,	  In some unused lagoon, some nameless bay,	  In some unused lagoon, some nameless bay,	  In some unused lagoon, some nameless bay,
  On sluggish, lonesome waters, anchor'd near the shore,	  On sluggish, lonesome waters, anchor'd near the shore,	  On sluggish, lonesome waters, anchor'd near the shore,	  On sluggish, lonesome waters, anchor'd near the shore,
  An old, dismasted, gray and batter'd ship, disabled, done,	  An old, dismasted, gray and batter'd ship, disabled, done,	  An old, dismasted, gray and batter'd ship, disabled, done,	  An old, dismasted, gray and batter'd ship, disabled, done,
  After free voyages to all the seas of earth, haul'd up at last and	  After free voyages to all the seas of earth, haul'd up at last and	  After free voyages to all the seas of earth, haul'd up at last and	  After free voyages to all the seas of earth, haul'd up at last and
      hawser'd tight,	      hawser'd tight,	      hawser'd tight,	      hawser'd tight,
  Lies rusting, mouldering.	  Lies rusting, mouldering.	  Lies rusting, mouldering.	  Lies rusting, mouldering.
			
			
			
			
Now Precedent Songs, Farewell	Now Precedent Songs, Farewell	Now Precedent Songs, Farewell	Now Precedent Songs, Farewell
			
  Now precedent songs, farewell--by every name farewell,	  Now precedent songs, farewell--by every name farewell,	  Now precedent songs, farewell--by every name farewell,	  Now precedent songs, farewell--by every name farewell,
  (Trains of a staggering line in many a strange procession, waggons,	  (Trains of a staggering line in many a strange procession, waggons,	  (Trains of a staggering line in many a strange procession, waggons,	  (Trains of a staggering line in many a strange procession, waggons,
  From ups and downs--with intervals--from elder years, mid-age, or youth,)	  From ups and downs--with intervals--from elder years, mid-age, or youth,)	  From ups and downs--with intervals--from elder years, mid-age, or youth,)	  From ups and downs--with intervals--from elder years, mid-age, or youth,)
  "In Cabin'd Ships, or Thee Old Cause or Poets to Come	  "In Cabin'd Ships, or Thee Old Cause or Poets to Come	  "In Cabin'd Ships, or Thee Old Cause or Poets to Come	  "In Cabin'd Ships, or Thee Old Cause or Poets to Come
  Or Paumanok, Song of Myself, Calamus, or Adam,	  Or Paumanok, Song of Myself, Calamus, or Adam,	  Or Paumanok, Song of Myself, Calamus, or Adam,	  Or Paumanok, Song of Myself, Calamus, or Adam,
  Or Beat! Beat! Drums! or To the Leaven'd Soil they Trod,	  Or Beat! Beat! Drums! or To the Leaven'd Soil they Trod,	  Or Beat! Beat! Drums! or To the Leaven'd Soil they Trod,	  Or Beat! Beat! Drums! or To the Leaven'd Soil they Trod,
  Or Captain! My Captain! Kosmos, Quicksand Years, or Thoughts,	  Or Captain! My Captain! Kosmos, Quicksand Years, or Thoughts,	  Or Captain! My Captain! Kosmos, Quicksand Years, or Thoughts,	  Or Captain! My Captain! Kosmos, Quicksand Years, or Thoughts,
  Thou Mother with thy Equal Brood," and many, many more unspecified,	  Thou Mother with thy Equal Brood," and many, many more unspecified,	  Thou Mother with thy Equal Brood," and many, many more unspecified,	  Thou Mother with thy Equal Brood," and many, many more unspecified,
  From fibre heart of mine--from throat and tongue--(My life's hot	  From fibre heart of mine--from throat and tongue--(My life's hot	  From fibre heart of mine--from throat and tongue--(My life's hot	  From fibre heart of mine--from throat and tongue--(My life's hot
      pulsing blood,	      pulsing blood,	      pulsing blood,	      pulsing blood,
  The personal urge and form for me--not merely paper, automatic type	  The personal urge and form for me--not merely paper, automatic type	  The personal urge and form for me--not merely paper, automatic type	  The personal urge and form for me--not merely paper, automatic type
      and ink,)	      and ink,)	      and ink,)	      and ink,)
  Each song of mine--each utterance in the past--having its long, long	  Each song of mine--each utterance in the past--having its long, long	  Each song of mine--each utterance in the past--having its long, long	  Each song of mine--each utterance in the past--having its long, long
      history,	      history,	      history,	      history,
  Of life or death, or soldier's wound, of country's loss or safety,	  Of life or death, or soldier's wound, of country's loss or safety,	  Of life or death, or soldier's wound, of country's loss or safety,	  Of life or death, or soldier's wound, of country's loss or safety,
  (O heaven! what flash and started endless train of all! compared	  (O heaven! what flash and started endless train of all! compared	  (O heaven! what flash and started endless train of all! compared	  (O heaven! what flash and started endless train of all! compared
      indeed to that!	      indeed to that!	      indeed to that!	      indeed to that!
  What wretched shred e'en at the best of all!)	  What wretched shred e'en at the best of all!)	  What wretched shred e'en at the best of all!)	  What wretched shred e'en at the best of all!)
			
			
			
			
An Evening Lull	An Evening Lull	An Evening Lull	An Evening Lull
			
  After a week of physical anguish,	  After a week of physical anguish,	  After a week of physical anguish,	  After a week of physical anguish,
  Unrest and pain, and feverish heat,	  Unrest and pain, and feverish heat,	  Unrest and pain, and feverish heat,	  Unrest and pain, and feverish heat,
  Toward the ending day a calm and lull comes on,	  Toward the ending day a calm and lull comes on,	  Toward the ending day a calm and lull comes on,	  Toward the ending day a calm and lull comes on,
  Three hours of peace and soothing rest of brain.	  Three hours of peace and soothing rest of brain.	  Three hours of peace and soothing rest of brain.	  Three hours of peace and soothing rest of brain.
			
			
			
			
Old Age's Lambent Peaks	Old Age's Lambent Peaks	Old Age's Lambent Peaks	Old Age's Lambent Peaks
			
  The touch of flame--the illuminating fire--the loftiest look at last,	  The touch of flame--the illuminating fire--the loftiest look at last,	  The touch of flame--the illuminating fire--the loftiest look at last,	  The touch of flame--the illuminating fire--the loftiest look at last,
  O'er city, passion, sea--o'er prairie, mountain, wood--the earth itself,	  O'er city, passion, sea--o'er prairie, mountain, wood--the earth itself,	  O'er city, passion, sea--o'er prairie, mountain, wood--the earth itself,	  O'er city, passion, sea--o'er prairie, mountain, wood--the earth itself,
  The airy, different, changing hues of all, in failing twilight,	  The airy, different, changing hues of all, in failing twilight,	  The airy, different, changing hues of all, in failing twilight,	  The airy, different, changing hues of all, in failing twilight,
  Objects and groups, bearings, faces, reminiscences;	  Objects and groups, bearings, faces, reminiscences;	  Objects and groups, bearings, faces, reminiscences;	  Objects and groups, bearings, faces, reminiscences;
  The calmer sight--the golden setting, clear and broad:	  The calmer sight--the golden setting, clear and broad:	  The calmer sight--the golden setting, clear and broad:	  The calmer sight--the golden setting, clear and broad:
  So much i' the atmosphere, the points of view, the situations whence	  So much i' the atmosphere, the points of view, the situations whence	  So much i' the atmosphere, the points of view, the situations whence	  So much i' the atmosphere, the points of view, the situations whence
      we scan,	      we scan,	      we scan,	      we scan,
  Bro't out by them alone--so much (perhaps the best) unreck'd before;	  Bro't out by them alone--so much (perhaps the best) unreck'd before;	  Bro't out by them alone--so much (perhaps the best) unreck'd before;	  Bro't out by them alone--so much (perhaps the best) unreck'd before;
  The lights indeed from them--old age's lambent peaks.	  The lights indeed from them--old age's lambent peaks.	  The lights indeed from them--old age's lambent peaks.	  The lights indeed from them--old age's lambent peaks.
			
			
			
			
After the Supper and Talk	After the Supper and Talk	After the Supper and Talk	After the Supper and Talk
			
  After the supper and talk--after the day is done,	  After the supper and talk--after the day is done,	  After the supper and talk--after the day is done,	  After the supper and talk--after the day is done,
  As a friend from friends his final withdrawal prolonging,	  As a friend from friends his final withdrawal prolonging,	  As a friend from friends his final withdrawal prolonging,	  As a friend from friends his final withdrawal prolonging,
  Good-bye and Good-bye with emotional lips repeating,	  Good-bye and Good-bye with emotional lips repeating,	  Good-bye and Good-bye with emotional lips repeating,	  Good-bye and Good-bye with emotional lips repeating,
  (So hard for his hand to release those hands--no more will they meet,	  (So hard for his hand to release those hands--no more will they meet,	  (So hard for his hand to release those hands--no more will they meet,	  (So hard for his hand to release those hands--no more will they meet,
  No more for communion of sorrow and joy, of old and young,	  No more for communion of sorrow and joy, of old and young,	  No more for communion of sorrow and joy, of old and young,	  No more for communion of sorrow and joy, of old and young,
  A far-stretching journey awaits him, to return no more,)	  A far-stretching journey awaits him, to return no more,)	  A far-stretching journey awaits him, to return no more,)	  A far-stretching journey awaits him, to return no more,)
  Shunning, postponing severance--seeking to ward off the last word	  Shunning, postponing severance--seeking to ward off the last word	  Shunning, postponing severance--seeking to ward off the last word	  Shunning, postponing severance--seeking to ward off the last word
      ever so little,	      ever so little,	      ever so little,	      ever so little,
  E'en at the exit-door turning--charges superfluous calling back--	  E'en at the exit-door turning--charges superfluous calling back--	  E'en at the exit-door turning--charges superfluous calling back--	  E'en at the exit-door turning--charges superfluous calling back--
      e'en as he descends the steps,	      e'en as he descends the steps,	      e'en as he descends the steps,	      e'en as he descends the steps,
  Something to eke out a minute additional--shadows of nightfall deepening,	  Something to eke out a minute additional--shadows of nightfall deepening,	  Something to eke out a minute additional--shadows of nightfall deepening,	  Something to eke out a minute additional--shadows of nightfall deepening,
  Farewells, messages lessening--dimmer the forthgoer's visage and form,	  Farewells, messages lessening--dimmer the forthgoer's visage and form,	  Farewells, messages lessening--dimmer the forthgoer's visage and form,	  Farewells, messages lessening--dimmer the forthgoer's visage and form,
  Soon to be lost for aye in the darkness--loth, O so loth to depart!	  Soon to be lost for aye in the darkness--loth, O so loth to depart!	  Soon to be lost for aye in the darkness--loth, O so loth to depart!	  Soon to be lost for aye in the darkness--loth, O so loth to depart!
  Garrulous to the very last.	  Garrulous to the very last.	  Garrulous to the very last.	  Garrulous to the very last.
			
			
			
			
BOOKXXXV.  GOOD-BYE MY FANCY	BOOKXXXV.  GOOD-BYE MY FANCY	BOOKXXXV.  GOOD-BYE MY FANCY	BOOKXXXV.  GOOD-BYE MY FANCY
			
			
Sail out for Good, Eidolon Yacht!	Sail out for Good, Eidolon Yacht!	Sail out for Good, Eidolon Yacht!	Sail out for Good, Eidolon Yacht!
			
  Heave the anchor short!	  Heave the anchor short!	  Heave the anchor short!	  Heave the anchor short!
  Raise main-sail and jib--steer forth,	  Raise main-sail and jib--steer forth,	  Raise main-sail and jib--steer forth,	  Raise main-sail and jib--steer forth,
  O little white-hull'd sloop, now speed on really deep waters,	  O little white-hull'd sloop, now speed on really deep waters,	  O little white-hull'd sloop, now speed on really deep waters,	  O little white-hull'd sloop, now speed on really deep waters,
  (I will not call it our concluding voyage,	  (I will not call it our concluding voyage,	  (I will not call it our concluding voyage,	  (I will not call it our concluding voyage,
  But outset and sure entrance to the truest, best, maturest;)	  But outset and sure entrance to the truest, best, maturest;)	  But outset and sure entrance to the truest, best, maturest;)	  But outset and sure entrance to the truest, best, maturest;)
  Depart, depart from solid earth--no more returning to these shores,	  Depart, depart from solid earth--no more returning to these shores,	  Depart, depart from solid earth--no more returning to these shores,	  Depart, depart from solid earth--no more returning to these shores,
  Now on for aye our infinite free venture wending,	  Now on for aye our infinite free venture wending,	  Now on for aye our infinite free venture wending,	  Now on for aye our infinite free venture wending,
  Spurning all yet tried ports, seas, hawsers, densities, gravitation,	  Spurning all yet tried ports, seas, hawsers, densities, gravitation,	  Spurning all yet tried ports, seas, hawsers, densities, gravitation,	  Spurning all yet tried ports, seas, hawsers, densities, gravitation,
  Sail out for good, eidolon yacht of me!	  Sail out for good, eidolon yacht of me!	  Sail out for good, eidolon yacht of me!	  Sail out for good, eidolon yacht of me!
			
			
			
			
Lingering Last Drops	Lingering Last Drops	Lingering Last Drops	Lingering Last Drops
			
  And whence and why come you?	  And whence and why come you?	  And whence and why come you?	  And whence and why come you?
			
  We know not whence, (was the answer,)	  We know not whence, (was the answer,)	  We know not whence, (was the answer,)	  We know not whence, (was the answer,)
  We only know that we drift here with the rest,	  We only know that we drift here with the rest,	  We only know that we drift here with the rest,	  We only know that we drift here with the rest,
  That we linger'd and lagg'd--but were wafted at last, and are now here,	  That we linger'd and lagg'd--but were wafted at last, and are now here,	  That we linger'd and lagg'd--but were wafted at last, and are now here,	  That we linger'd and lagg'd--but were wafted at last, and are now here,
  To make the passing shower's concluding drops.	  To make the passing shower's concluding drops.	  To make the passing shower's concluding drops.	  To make the passing shower's concluding drops.
			
			
			
			
Good-Bye My Fancy	Good-Bye My Fancy	Good-Bye My Fancy	Good-Bye My Fancy
			
  Good-bye my fancy--(I had a word to say,	  Good-bye my fancy--(I had a word to say,	  Good-bye my fancy--(I had a word to say,	  Good-bye my fancy--(I had a word to say,
  But 'tis not quite the time--The best of any man's word or say,	  But 'tis not quite the time--The best of any man's word or say,	  But 'tis not quite the time--The best of any man's word or say,	  But 'tis not quite the time--The best of any man's word or say,
  Is when its proper place arrives--and for its meaning,	  Is when its proper place arrives--and for its meaning,	  Is when its proper place arrives--and for its meaning,	  Is when its proper place arrives--and for its meaning,
  I keep mine till the last.)	  I keep mine till the last.)	  I keep mine till the last.)	  I keep mine till the last.)
			
			
			
			
On, on the Same, Ye Jocund Twain!	On, on the Same, Ye Jocund Twain!	On, on the Same, Ye Jocund Twain!	On, on the Same, Ye Jocund Twain!
			
  On, on the same, ye jocund twain!	  On, on the same, ye jocund twain!	  On, on the same, ye jocund twain!	  On, on the same, ye jocund twain!
  My life and recitative, containing birth, youth, mid-age years,	  My life and recitative, containing birth, youth, mid-age years,	  My life and recitative, containing birth, youth, mid-age years,	  My life and recitative, containing birth, youth, mid-age years,
  Fitful as motley-tongues of flame, inseparably twined and merged in	  Fitful as motley-tongues of flame, inseparably twined and merged in	  Fitful as motley-tongues of flame, inseparably twined and merged in	  Fitful as motley-tongues of flame, inseparably twined and merged in
      one--combining all,	      one--combining all,	      one--combining all,	      one--combining all,
  My single soul--aims, confirmations, failures, joys--Nor single soul alone,	  My single soul--aims, confirmations, failures, joys--Nor single soul alone,	  My single soul--aims, confirmations, failures, joys--Nor single soul alone,	  My single soul--aims, confirmations, failures, joys--Nor single soul alone,
  I chant my nation's crucial stage, (America's, haply humanity's)--	  I chant my nation's crucial stage, (America's, haply humanity's)--	  I chant my nation's crucial stage, (America's, haply humanity's)--	  I chant my nation's crucial stage, (America's, haply humanity's)--
      the trial great, the victory great,	      the trial great, the victory great,	      the trial great, the victory great,	      the trial great, the victory great,
  A strange eclaircissement of all the masses past, the eastern world,	  A strange eclaircissement of all the masses past, the eastern world,	  A strange eclaircissement of all the masses past, the eastern world,	  A strange eclaircissement of all the masses past, the eastern world,
      the ancient, medieval,	      the ancient, medieval,	      the ancient, medieval,	      the ancient, medieval,
  Here, here from wanderings, strayings, lessons, wars, defeats--here	  Here, here from wanderings, strayings, lessons, wars, defeats--here	  Here, here from wanderings, strayings, lessons, wars, defeats--here	  Here, here from wanderings, strayings, lessons, wars, defeats--here
      at the west a voice triumphant--justifying all,	      at the west a voice triumphant--justifying all,	      at the west a voice triumphant--justifying all,	      at the west a voice triumphant--justifying all,
  A gladsome pealing cry--a song for once of utmost pride and satisfaction;	  A gladsome pealing cry--a song for once of utmost pride and satisfaction;	  A gladsome pealing cry--a song for once of utmost pride and satisfaction;	  A gladsome pealing cry--a song for once of utmost pride and satisfaction;
  I chant from it the common bulk, the general average horde, (the	  I chant from it the common bulk, the general average horde, (the	  I chant from it the common bulk, the general average horde, (the	  I chant from it the common bulk, the general average horde, (the
      best sooner than the worst)--And now I chant old age,	      best sooner than the worst)--And now I chant old age,	      best sooner than the worst)--And now I chant old age,	      best sooner than the worst)--And now I chant old age,
  (My verses, written first for forenoon life, and for the summer's,	  (My verses, written first for forenoon life, and for the summer's,	  (My verses, written first for forenoon life, and for the summer's,	  (My verses, written first for forenoon life, and for the summer's,
      autumn's spread,	      autumn's spread,	      autumn's spread,	      autumn's spread,
  I pass to snow-white hairs the same, and give to pulses	  I pass to snow-white hairs the same, and give to pulses	  I pass to snow-white hairs the same, and give to pulses	  I pass to snow-white hairs the same, and give to pulses
      winter-cool'd the same;)	      winter-cool'd the same;)	      winter-cool'd the same;)	      winter-cool'd the same;)
  As here in careless trill, I and my recitatives, with faith and love,	  As here in careless trill, I and my recitatives, with faith and love,	  As here in careless trill, I and my recitatives, with faith and love,	  As here in careless trill, I and my recitatives, with faith and love,
  wafting to other work, to unknown songs, conditions,	  wafting to other work, to unknown songs, conditions,	  wafting to other work, to unknown songs, conditions,	  wafting to other work, to unknown songs, conditions,
  On, on ye jocund twain! continue on the same!	  On, on ye jocund twain! continue on the same!	  On, on ye jocund twain! continue on the same!	  On, on ye jocund twain! continue on the same!
			
			
			
			
MY 71st Year	MY 71st Year	MY 71st Year	MY 71st Year
			
  After surmounting three-score and ten,	  After surmounting three-score and ten,	  After surmounting three-score and ten,	  After surmounting three-score and ten,
  With all their chances, changes, losses, sorrows,	  With all their chances, changes, losses, sorrows,	  With all their chances, changes, losses, sorrows,	  With all their chances, changes, losses, sorrows,
  My parents' deaths, the vagaries of my life, the many tearing	  My parents' deaths, the vagaries of my life, the many tearing	  My parents' deaths, the vagaries of my life, the many tearing	  My parents' deaths, the vagaries of my life, the many tearing
      passions of me, the war of '63 and '4,	      passions of me, the war of '63 and '4,	      passions of me, the war of '63 and '4,	      passions of me, the war of '63 and '4,
  As some old broken soldier, after a long, hot, wearying march, or	  As some old broken soldier, after a long, hot, wearying march, or	  As some old broken soldier, after a long, hot, wearying march, or	  As some old broken soldier, after a long, hot, wearying march, or
      haply after battle,	      haply after battle,	      haply after battle,	      haply after battle,
  To-day at twilight, hobbling, answering company roll-call, Here,	  To-day at twilight, hobbling, answering company roll-call, Here,	  To-day at twilight, hobbling, answering company roll-call, Here,	  To-day at twilight, hobbling, answering company roll-call, Here,
      with vital voice,	      with vital voice,	      with vital voice,	      with vital voice,
  Reporting yet, saluting yet the Officer over all.	  Reporting yet, saluting yet the Officer over all.	  Reporting yet, saluting yet the Officer over all.	  Reporting yet, saluting yet the Officer over all.
			
			
			
			
Apparitions	Apparitions	Apparitions	Apparitions
			
  A vague mist hanging 'round half the pages:	  A vague mist hanging 'round half the pages:	  A vague mist hanging 'round half the pages:	  A vague mist hanging 'round half the pages:
  (Sometimes how strange and clear to the soul,	  (Sometimes how strange and clear to the soul,	  (Sometimes how strange and clear to the soul,	  (Sometimes how strange and clear to the soul,
  That all these solid things are indeed but apparitions, concepts,	  That all these solid things are indeed but apparitions, concepts,	  That all these solid things are indeed but apparitions, concepts,	  That all these solid things are indeed but apparitions, concepts,
      non-realities.)	      non-realities.)	      non-realities.)	      non-realities.)
			
			
			
			
The Pallid Wreath	The Pallid Wreath	The Pallid Wreath	The Pallid Wreath
			
  Somehow I cannot let it go yet, funeral though it is,	  Somehow I cannot let it go yet, funeral though it is,	  Somehow I cannot let it go yet, funeral though it is,	  Somehow I cannot let it go yet, funeral though it is,
  Let it remain back there on its nail suspended,	  Let it remain back there on its nail suspended,	  Let it remain back there on its nail suspended,	  Let it remain back there on its nail suspended,
  With pink, blue, yellow, all blanch'd, and the white now gray and ashy,	  With pink, blue, yellow, all blanch'd, and the white now gray and ashy,	  With pink, blue, yellow, all blanch'd, and the white now gray and ashy,	  With pink, blue, yellow, all blanch'd, and the white now gray and ashy,
  One wither'd rose put years ago for thee, dear friend;	  One wither'd rose put years ago for thee, dear friend;	  One wither'd rose put years ago for thee, dear friend;	  One wither'd rose put years ago for thee, dear friend;
  But I do not forget thee. Hast thou then faded?	  But I do not forget thee. Hast thou then faded?	  But I do not forget thee. Hast thou then faded?	  But I do not forget thee. Hast thou then faded?
  Is the odor exhaled? Are the colors, vitalities, dead?	  Is the odor exhaled? Are the colors, vitalities, dead?	  Is the odor exhaled? Are the colors, vitalities, dead?	  Is the odor exhaled? Are the colors, vitalities, dead?
  No, while memories subtly play--the past vivid as ever;	  No, while memories subtly play--the past vivid as ever;	  No, while memories subtly play--the past vivid as ever;	  No, while memories subtly play--the past vivid as ever;
  For but last night I woke, and in that spectral ring saw thee,	  For but last night I woke, and in that spectral ring saw thee,	  For but last night I woke, and in that spectral ring saw thee,	  For but last night I woke, and in that spectral ring saw thee,
  Thy smile, eyes, face, calm, silent, loving as ever:	  Thy smile, eyes, face, calm, silent, loving as ever:	  Thy smile, eyes, face, calm, silent, loving as ever:	  Thy smile, eyes, face, calm, silent, loving as ever:
  So let the wreath hang still awhile within my eye-reach,	  So let the wreath hang still awhile within my eye-reach,	  So let the wreath hang still awhile within my eye-reach,	  So let the wreath hang still awhile within my eye-reach,
  It is not yet dead to me, nor even pallid.	  It is not yet dead to me, nor even pallid.	  It is not yet dead to me, nor even pallid.	  It is not yet dead to me, nor even pallid.
			
			
			
			
An Ended Day	An Ended Day	An Ended Day	An Ended Day
			
  The soothing sanity and blitheness of completion,	  The soothing sanity and blitheness of completion,	  The soothing sanity and blitheness of completion,	  The soothing sanity and blitheness of completion,
  The pomp and hurried contest-glare and rush are done;	  The pomp and hurried contest-glare and rush are done;	  The pomp and hurried contest-glare and rush are done;	  The pomp and hurried contest-glare and rush are done;
  Now triumph! transformation! jubilate!	  Now triumph! transformation! jubilate!	  Now triumph! transformation! jubilate!	  Now triumph! transformation! jubilate!
			
			
			
			
Old Age's Ship & Crafty Death's	Old Age's Ship & Crafty Death's	Old Age's Ship & Crafty Death's	Old Age's Ship & Crafty Death's
			
  From east and west across the horizon's edge,	  From east and west across the horizon's edge,	  From east and west across the horizon's edge,	  From east and west across the horizon's edge,
  Two mighty masterful vessels sailers steal upon us:	  Two mighty masterful vessels sailers steal upon us:	  Two mighty masterful vessels sailers steal upon us:	  Two mighty masterful vessels sailers steal upon us:
  But we'll make race a-time upon the seas--a battle-contest yet! bear	  But we'll make race a-time upon the seas--a battle-contest yet! bear	  But we'll make race a-time upon the seas--a battle-contest yet! bear	  But we'll make race a-time upon the seas--a battle-contest yet! bear
      lively there!	      lively there!	      lively there!	      lively there!
  (Our joys of strife and derring-do to the last!)	  (Our joys of strife and derring-do to the last!)	  (Our joys of strife and derring-do to the last!)	  (Our joys of strife and derring-do to the last!)
  Put on the old ship all her power to-day!	  Put on the old ship all her power to-day!	  Put on the old ship all her power to-day!	  Put on the old ship all her power to-day!
  Crowd top-sail, top-gallant and royal studding-sails,	  Crowd top-sail, top-gallant and royal studding-sails,	  Crowd top-sail, top-gallant and royal studding-sails,	  Crowd top-sail, top-gallant and royal studding-sails,
  Out challenge and defiance--flags and flaunting pennants added,	  Out challenge and defiance--flags and flaunting pennants added,	  Out challenge and defiance--flags and flaunting pennants added,	  Out challenge and defiance--flags and flaunting pennants added,
  As we take to the open--take to the deepest, freest waters.	  As we take to the open--take to the deepest, freest waters.	  As we take to the open--take to the deepest, freest waters.	  As we take to the open--take to the deepest, freest waters.
			
			
			
			
To the Pending Year	To the Pending Year	To the Pending Year	To the Pending Year
			
  Have I no weapon-word for thee--some message brief and fierce?	  Have I no weapon-word for thee--some message brief and fierce?	  Have I no weapon-word for thee--some message brief and fierce?	  Have I no weapon-word for thee--some message brief and fierce?
  (Have I fought out and done indeed the battle?) Is there no shot left,	  (Have I fought out and done indeed the battle?) Is there no shot left,	  (Have I fought out and done indeed the battle?) Is there no shot left,	  (Have I fought out and done indeed the battle?) Is there no shot left,
  For all thy affectations, lisps, scorns, manifold silliness?	  For all thy affectations, lisps, scorns, manifold silliness?	  For all thy affectations, lisps, scorns, manifold silliness?	  For all thy affectations, lisps, scorns, manifold silliness?
  Nor for myself--my own rebellious self in thee?	  Nor for myself--my own rebellious self in thee?	  Nor for myself--my own rebellious self in thee?	  Nor for myself--my own rebellious self in thee?
			
  Down, down, proud gorge!--though choking thee;	  Down, down, proud gorge!--though choking thee;	  Down, down, proud gorge!--though choking thee;	  Down, down, proud gorge!--though choking thee;
  Thy bearded throat and high-borne forehead to the gutter;	  Thy bearded throat and high-borne forehead to the gutter;	  Thy bearded throat and high-borne forehead to the gutter;	  Thy bearded throat and high-borne forehead to the gutter;
  Crouch low thy neck to eleemosynary gifts.	  Crouch low thy neck to eleemosynary gifts.	  Crouch low thy neck to eleemosynary gifts.	  Crouch low thy neck to eleemosynary gifts.
			
			
			
			
Shakspere-Bacon's Cipher	Shakspere-Bacon's Cipher	Shakspere-Bacon's Cipher	Shakspere-Bacon's Cipher
			
  I doubt it not--then more, far more;	  I doubt it not--then more, far more;	  I doubt it not--then more, far more;	  I doubt it not--then more, far more;
  In each old song bequeath'd--in every noble page or text,	  In each old song bequeath'd--in every noble page or text,	  In each old song bequeath'd--in every noble page or text,	  In each old song bequeath'd--in every noble page or text,
  (Different--something unreck'd before--some unsuspected author,)	  (Different--something unreck'd before--some unsuspected author,)	  (Different--something unreck'd before--some unsuspected author,)	  (Different--something unreck'd before--some unsuspected author,)
  In every object, mountain, tree, and star--in every birth and life,	  In every object, mountain, tree, and star--in every birth and life,	  In every object, mountain, tree, and star--in every birth and life,	  In every object, mountain, tree, and star--in every birth and life,
  As part of each--evolv'd from each--meaning, behind the ostent,	  As part of each--evolv'd from each--meaning, behind the ostent,	  As part of each--evolv'd from each--meaning, behind the ostent,	  As part of each--evolv'd from each--meaning, behind the ostent,
  A mystic cipher waits infolded.	  A mystic cipher waits infolded.	  A mystic cipher waits infolded.	  A mystic cipher waits infolded.
			
			
			
			
Long, Long Hence	Long, Long Hence	Long, Long Hence	Long, Long Hence
			
  After a long, long course, hundreds of years, denials,	  After a long, long course, hundreds of years, denials,	  After a long, long course, hundreds of years, denials,	  After a long, long course, hundreds of years, denials,
  Accumulations, rous'd love and joy and thought,	  Accumulations, rous'd love and joy and thought,	  Accumulations, rous'd love and joy and thought,	  Accumulations, rous'd love and joy and thought,
  Hopes, wishes, aspirations, ponderings, victories, myriads of readers,	  Hopes, wishes, aspirations, ponderings, victories, myriads of readers,	  Hopes, wishes, aspirations, ponderings, victories, myriads of readers,	  Hopes, wishes, aspirations, ponderings, victories, myriads of readers,
  Coating, compassing, covering--after ages' and ages' encrustations,	  Coating, compassing, covering--after ages' and ages' encrustations,	  Coating, compassing, covering--after ages' and ages' encrustations,	  Coating, compassing, covering--after ages' and ages' encrustations,
  Then only may these songs reach fruition.	  Then only may these songs reach fruition.	  Then only may these songs reach fruition.	  Then only may these songs reach fruition.
			
			
			
			
Bravo, Paris Exposition!	Bravo, Paris Exposition!	Bravo, Paris Exposition!	Bravo, Paris Exposition!
			
  Add to your show, before you close it, France,	  Add to your show, before you close it, France,	  Add to your show, before you close it, France,	  Add to your show, before you close it, France,
  With all the rest, visible, concrete, temples, towers, goods,	  With all the rest, visible, concrete, temples, towers, goods,	  With all the rest, visible, concrete, temples, towers, goods,	  With all the rest, visible, concrete, temples, towers, goods,
      machines and ores,	      machines and ores,	      machines and ores,	      machines and ores,
  Our sentiment wafted from many million heart-throbs, ethereal but solid,	  Our sentiment wafted from many million heart-throbs, ethereal but solid,	  Our sentiment wafted from many million heart-throbs, ethereal but solid,	  Our sentiment wafted from many million heart-throbs, ethereal but solid,
  (We grand-sons and great-grandsons do not forget your grandsires,)	  (We grand-sons and great-grandsons do not forget your grandsires,)	  (We grand-sons and great-grandsons do not forget your grandsires,)	  (We grand-sons and great-grandsons do not forget your grandsires,)
  From fifty Nations and nebulous Nations, compacted, sent oversea to-day,	  From fifty Nations and nebulous Nations, compacted, sent oversea to-day,	  From fifty Nations and nebulous Nations, compacted, sent oversea to-day,	  From fifty Nations and nebulous Nations, compacted, sent oversea to-day,
  America's applause, love, memories and good-will.	  America's applause, love, memories and good-will.	  America's applause, love, memories and good-will.	  America's applause, love, memories and good-will.
			
			
			
			
Interpolation Sounds	Interpolation Sounds	Interpolation Sounds	Interpolation Sounds
			
  Over and through the burial chant,	  Over and through the burial chant,	  Over and through the burial chant,	  Over and through the burial chant,
  Organ and solemn service, sermon, bending priests,	  Organ and solemn service, sermon, bending priests,	  Organ and solemn service, sermon, bending priests,	  Organ and solemn service, sermon, bending priests,
  To me come interpolation sounds not in the show--plainly to me,	  To me come interpolation sounds not in the show--plainly to me,	  To me come interpolation sounds not in the show--plainly to me,	  To me come interpolation sounds not in the show--plainly to me,
      crowding up the aisle and from the window,	      crowding up the aisle and from the window,	      crowding up the aisle and from the window,	      crowding up the aisle and from the window,
  Of sudden battle's hurry and harsh noises--war's grim game to sight	  Of sudden battle's hurry and harsh noises--war's grim game to sight	  Of sudden battle's hurry and harsh noises--war's grim game to sight	  Of sudden battle's hurry and harsh noises--war's grim game to sight
      and ear in earnest;	      and ear in earnest;	      and ear in earnest;	      and ear in earnest;
  The scout call'd up and forward--the general mounted and his aides	  The scout call'd up and forward--the general mounted and his aides	  The scout call'd up and forward--the general mounted and his aides	  The scout call'd up and forward--the general mounted and his aides
      around him--the new-brought word--the instantaneous order issued;	      around him--the new-brought word--the instantaneous order issued;	      around him--the new-brought word--the instantaneous order issued;	      around him--the new-brought word--the instantaneous order issued;
  The rifle crack--the cannon thud--the rushing forth of men from their	  The rifle crack--the cannon thud--the rushing forth of men from their	  The rifle crack--the cannon thud--the rushing forth of men from their	  The rifle crack--the cannon thud--the rushing forth of men from their
      tents;	      tents;	      tents;	      tents;
  The clank of cavalry--the strange celerity of forming ranks--the	  The clank of cavalry--the strange celerity of forming ranks--the	  The clank of cavalry--the strange celerity of forming ranks--the	  The clank of cavalry--the strange celerity of forming ranks--the
      slender bugle note;	      slender bugle note;	      slender bugle note;	      slender bugle note;
  The sound of horses' hoofs departing--saddles, arms, accoutrements.	  The sound of horses' hoofs departing--saddles, arms, accoutrements.	  The sound of horses' hoofs departing--saddles, arms, accoutrements.	  The sound of horses' hoofs departing--saddles, arms, accoutrements.
			
			
			
			
To the Sun-Set Breeze	To the Sun-Set Breeze	To the Sun-Set Breeze	To the Sun-Set Breeze
			
  Ah, whispering, something again, unseen,	  Ah, whispering, something again, unseen,	  Ah, whispering, something again, unseen,	  Ah, whispering, something again, unseen,
  Where late this heated day thou enterest at my window, door,	  Where late this heated day thou enterest at my window, door,	  Where late this heated day thou enterest at my window, door,	  Where late this heated day thou enterest at my window, door,
  Thou, laving, tempering all, cool-freshing, gently vitalizing	  Thou, laving, tempering all, cool-freshing, gently vitalizing	  Thou, laving, tempering all, cool-freshing, gently vitalizing	  Thou, laving, tempering all, cool-freshing, gently vitalizing
  Me, old, alone, sick, weak-down, melted-worn with sweat;	  Me, old, alone, sick, weak-down, melted-worn with sweat;	  Me, old, alone, sick, weak-down, melted-worn with sweat;	  Me, old, alone, sick, weak-down, melted-worn with sweat;
  Thou, nestling, folding close and firm yet soft, companion better	  Thou, nestling, folding close and firm yet soft, companion better	  Thou, nestling, folding close and firm yet soft, companion better	  Thou, nestling, folding close and firm yet soft, companion better
      than talk, book, art,	      than talk, book, art,	      than talk, book, art,	      than talk, book, art,
  (Thou hast, O Nature! elements! utterance to my heart beyond the	  (Thou hast, O Nature! elements! utterance to my heart beyond the	  (Thou hast, O Nature! elements! utterance to my heart beyond the	  (Thou hast, O Nature! elements! utterance to my heart beyond the
      rest--and this is of them,)	      rest--and this is of them,)	      rest--and this is of them,)	      rest--and this is of them,)
  So sweet thy primitive taste to breathe within--thy soothing fingers	  So sweet thy primitive taste to breathe within--thy soothing fingers	  So sweet thy primitive taste to breathe within--thy soothing fingers	  So sweet thy primitive taste to breathe within--thy soothing fingers
      my face and hands,	      my face and hands,	      my face and hands,	      my face and hands,
  Thou, messenger--magical strange bringer to body and spirit of me,	  Thou, messenger--magical strange bringer to body and spirit of me,	  Thou, messenger--magical strange bringer to body and spirit of me,	  Thou, messenger--magical strange bringer to body and spirit of me,
  (Distances balk'd--occult medicines penetrating me from head to foot,)	  (Distances balk'd--occult medicines penetrating me from head to foot,)	  (Distances balk'd--occult medicines penetrating me from head to foot,)	  (Distances balk'd--occult medicines penetrating me from head to foot,)
  I feel the sky, the prairies vast--I feel the mighty northern lakes,	  I feel the sky, the prairies vast--I feel the mighty northern lakes,	  I feel the sky, the prairies vast--I feel the mighty northern lakes,	  I feel the sky, the prairies vast--I feel the mighty northern lakes,
  I feel the ocean and the forest--somehow I feel the globe itself	  I feel the ocean and the forest--somehow I feel the globe itself	  I feel the ocean and the forest--somehow I feel the globe itself	  I feel the ocean and the forest--somehow I feel the globe itself
      swift-swimming in space;	      swift-swimming in space;	      swift-swimming in space;	      swift-swimming in space;
  Thou blown from lips so loved, now gone--haply from endless store,	  Thou blown from lips so loved, now gone--haply from endless store,	  Thou blown from lips so loved, now gone--haply from endless store,	  Thou blown from lips so loved, now gone--haply from endless store,
      God-sent,	      God-sent,	      God-sent,	      God-sent,
  (For thou art spiritual, Godly, most of all known to my sense,)	  (For thou art spiritual, Godly, most of all known to my sense,)	  (For thou art spiritual, Godly, most of all known to my sense,)	  (For thou art spiritual, Godly, most of all known to my sense,)
  Minister to speak to me, here and now, what word has never told, and	  Minister to speak to me, here and now, what word has never told, and	  Minister to speak to me, here and now, what word has never told, and	  Minister to speak to me, here and now, what word has never told, and
      cannot tell,	      cannot tell,	      cannot tell,	      cannot tell,
  Art thou not universal concrete's distillation? Law's, all	  Art thou not universal concrete's distillation? Law's, all	  Art thou not universal concrete's distillation? Law's, all	  Art thou not universal concrete's distillation? Law's, all
      Astronomy's last refinement?	      Astronomy's last refinement?	      Astronomy's last refinement?	      Astronomy's last refinement?
  Hast thou no soul? Can I not know, identify thee?	  Hast thou no soul? Can I not know, identify thee?	  Hast thou no soul? Can I not know, identify thee?	  Hast thou no soul? Can I not know, identify thee?
			
			
			
			
Old Chants	Old Chants	Old Chants	Old Chants
			
  An ancient song, reciting, ending,	  An ancient song, reciting, ending,	  An ancient song, reciting, ending,	  An ancient song, reciting, ending,
  Once gazing toward thee, Mother of All,	  Once gazing toward thee, Mother of All,	  Once gazing toward thee, Mother of All,	  Once gazing toward thee, Mother of All,
  Musing, seeking themes fitted for thee,	  Musing, seeking themes fitted for thee,	  Musing, seeking themes fitted for thee,	  Musing, seeking themes fitted for thee,
  Accept me, thou saidst, the elder ballads,	  Accept me, thou saidst, the elder ballads,	  Accept me, thou saidst, the elder ballads,	  Accept me, thou saidst, the elder ballads,
  And name for me before thou goest each ancient poet.	  And name for me before thou goest each ancient poet.	  And name for me before thou goest each ancient poet.	  And name for me before thou goest each ancient poet.
			
  (Of many debts incalculable,	  (Of many debts incalculable,	  (Of many debts incalculable,	  (Of many debts incalculable,
  Haply our New World's chieftest debt is to old poems.)	  Haply our New World's chieftest debt is to old poems.)	  Haply our New World's chieftest debt is to old poems.)	  Haply our New World's chieftest debt is to old poems.)
			
  Ever so far back, preluding thee, America,	  Ever so far back, preluding thee, America,	  Ever so far back, preluding thee, America,	  Ever so far back, preluding thee, America,
  Old chants, Egyptian priests, and those of Ethiopia,	  Old chants, Egyptian priests, and those of Ethiopia,	  Old chants, Egyptian priests, and those of Ethiopia,	  Old chants, Egyptian priests, and those of Ethiopia,
  The Hindu epics, the Grecian, Chinese, Persian,	  The Hindu epics, the Grecian, Chinese, Persian,	  The Hindu epics, the Grecian, Chinese, Persian,	  The Hindu epics, the Grecian, Chinese, Persian,
  The Biblic books and prophets, and deep idyls of the Nazarene,	  The Biblic books and prophets, and deep idyls of the Nazarene,	  The Biblic books and prophets, and deep idyls of the Nazarene,	  The Biblic books and prophets, and deep idyls of the Nazarene,
  The Iliad, Odyssey, plots, doings, wanderings of Eneas,	  The Iliad, Odyssey, plots, doings, wanderings of Eneas,	  The Iliad, Odyssey, plots, doings, wanderings of Eneas,	  The Iliad, Odyssey, plots, doings, wanderings of Eneas,
  Hesiod, Eschylus, Sophocles, Merlin, Arthur,	  Hesiod, Eschylus, Sophocles, Merlin, Arthur,	  Hesiod, Eschylus, Sophocles, Merlin, Arthur,	  Hesiod, Eschylus, Sophocles, Merlin, Arthur,
  The Cid, Roland at Roncesvalles, the Nibelungen,	  The Cid, Roland at Roncesvalles, the Nibelungen,	  The Cid, Roland at Roncesvalles, the Nibelungen,	  The Cid, Roland at Roncesvalles, the Nibelungen,
  The troubadours, minstrels, minnesingers, skalds,	  The troubadours, minstrels, minnesingers, skalds,	  The troubadours, minstrels, minnesingers, skalds,	  The troubadours, minstrels, minnesingers, skalds,
  Chaucer, Dante, flocks of singing birds,	  Chaucer, Dante, flocks of singing birds,	  Chaucer, Dante, flocks of singing birds,	  Chaucer, Dante, flocks of singing birds,
  The Border Minstrelsy, the bye-gone ballads, feudal tales, essays, plays,	  The Border Minstrelsy, the bye-gone ballads, feudal tales, essays, plays,	  The Border Minstrelsy, the bye-gone ballads, feudal tales, essays, plays,	  The Border Minstrelsy, the bye-gone ballads, feudal tales, essays, plays,
  Shakespere, Schiller, Walter Scott, Tennyson,	  Shakespere, Schiller, Walter Scott, Tennyson,	  Shakespere, Schiller, Walter Scott, Tennyson,	  Shakespere, Schiller, Walter Scott, Tennyson,
  As some vast wondrous weird dream-presences,	  As some vast wondrous weird dream-presences,	  As some vast wondrous weird dream-presences,	  As some vast wondrous weird dream-presences,
  The great shadowy groups gathering around,	  The great shadowy groups gathering around,	  The great shadowy groups gathering around,	  The great shadowy groups gathering around,
  Darting their mighty masterful eyes forward at thee,	  Darting their mighty masterful eyes forward at thee,	  Darting their mighty masterful eyes forward at thee,	  Darting their mighty masterful eyes forward at thee,
  Thou! with as now thy bending neck and head, with courteous hand	  Thou! with as now thy bending neck and head, with courteous hand	  Thou! with as now thy bending neck and head, with courteous hand	  Thou! with as now thy bending neck and head, with courteous hand
      and word, ascending,	      and word, ascending,	      and word, ascending,	      and word, ascending,
  Thou! pausing a moment, drooping thine eyes upon them, blent	  Thou! pausing a moment, drooping thine eyes upon them, blent	  Thou! pausing a moment, drooping thine eyes upon them, blent	  Thou! pausing a moment, drooping thine eyes upon them, blent
      with their music,	      with their music,	      with their music,	      with their music,
  Well pleased, accepting all, curiously prepared for by them,	  Well pleased, accepting all, curiously prepared for by them,	  Well pleased, accepting all, curiously prepared for by them,	  Well pleased, accepting all, curiously prepared for by them,
  Thou enterest at thy entrance porch.	  Thou enterest at thy entrance porch.	  Thou enterest at thy entrance porch.	  Thou enterest at thy entrance porch.
			
			
			
			
A Christmas Greeting	A Christmas Greeting	A Christmas Greeting	A Christmas Greeting
			
  Welcome, Brazilian brother--thy ample place is ready;	  Welcome, Brazilian brother--thy ample place is ready;	  Welcome, Brazilian brother--thy ample place is ready;	  Welcome, Brazilian brother--thy ample place is ready;
  A loving hand--a smile from the north--a sunny instant hall!	  A loving hand--a smile from the north--a sunny instant hall!	  A loving hand--a smile from the north--a sunny instant hall!	  A loving hand--a smile from the north--a sunny instant hall!
  (Let the future care for itself, where it reveals its troubles,	  (Let the future care for itself, where it reveals its troubles,	  (Let the future care for itself, where it reveals its troubles,	  (Let the future care for itself, where it reveals its troubles,
      impedimentas,	      impedimentas,	      impedimentas,	      impedimentas,
  Ours, ours the present throe, the democratic aim, the acceptance and	  Ours, ours the present throe, the democratic aim, the acceptance and	  Ours, ours the present throe, the democratic aim, the acceptance and	  Ours, ours the present throe, the democratic aim, the acceptance and
      the faith;)	      the faith;)	      the faith;)	      the faith;)
  To thee to-day our reaching arm, our turning neck--to thee from us	  To thee to-day our reaching arm, our turning neck--to thee from us	  To thee to-day our reaching arm, our turning neck--to thee from us	  To thee to-day our reaching arm, our turning neck--to thee from us
      the expectant eye,	      the expectant eye,	      the expectant eye,	      the expectant eye,
  Thou cluster free! thou brilliant lustrous one! thou, learning well,	  Thou cluster free! thou brilliant lustrous one! thou, learning well,	  Thou cluster free! thou brilliant lustrous one! thou, learning well,	  Thou cluster free! thou brilliant lustrous one! thou, learning well,
  The true lesson of a nation's light in the sky,	  The true lesson of a nation's light in the sky,	  The true lesson of a nation's light in the sky,	  The true lesson of a nation's light in the sky,
  (More shining than the Cross, more than the Crown,)	  (More shining than the Cross, more than the Crown,)	  (More shining than the Cross, more than the Crown,)	  (More shining than the Cross, more than the Crown,)
  The height to be superb humanity.	  The height to be superb humanity.	  The height to be superb humanity.	  The height to be superb humanity.
			
			
			
			
Sounds of the Winter	Sounds of the Winter	Sounds of the Winter	Sounds of the Winter
			
  Sounds of the winter too,	  Sounds of the winter too,	  Sounds of the winter too,	  Sounds of the winter too,
  Sunshine upon the mountains--many a distant strain	  Sunshine upon the mountains--many a distant strain	  Sunshine upon the mountains--many a distant strain	  Sunshine upon the mountains--many a distant strain
  From cheery railroad train--from nearer field, barn, house,	  From cheery railroad train--from nearer field, barn, house,	  From cheery railroad train--from nearer field, barn, house,	  From cheery railroad train--from nearer field, barn, house,
  The whispering air--even the mute crops, garner'd apples, corn,	  The whispering air--even the mute crops, garner'd apples, corn,	  The whispering air--even the mute crops, garner'd apples, corn,	  The whispering air--even the mute crops, garner'd apples, corn,
  Children's and women's tones--rhythm of many a farmer and of flail,	  Children's and women's tones--rhythm of many a farmer and of flail,	  Children's and women's tones--rhythm of many a farmer and of flail,	  Children's and women's tones--rhythm of many a farmer and of flail,
  An old man's garrulous lips among the rest, Think not we give out yet,	  An old man's garrulous lips among the rest, Think not we give out yet,	  An old man's garrulous lips among the rest, Think not we give out yet,	  An old man's garrulous lips among the rest, Think not we give out yet,
  Forth from these snowy hairs we keep up yet the lilt.	  Forth from these snowy hairs we keep up yet the lilt.	  Forth from these snowy hairs we keep up yet the lilt.	  Forth from these snowy hairs we keep up yet the lilt.
			
			
			
			
A Twilight Song	A Twilight Song	A Twilight Song	A Twilight Song
			
  As I sit in twilight late alone by the flickering oak-flame,	  As I sit in twilight late alone by the flickering oak-flame,	  As I sit in twilight late alone by the flickering oak-flame,	  As I sit in twilight late alone by the flickering oak-flame,
  Musing on long-pass'd war-scenes--of the countless buried unknown	  Musing on long-pass'd war-scenes--of the countless buried unknown	  Musing on long-pass'd war-scenes--of the countless buried unknown	  Musing on long-pass'd war-scenes--of the countless buried unknown
      soldiers,	      soldiers,	      soldiers,	      soldiers,
  Of the vacant names, as unindented air's and sea's--the unreturn'd,	  Of the vacant names, as unindented air's and sea's--the unreturn'd,	  Of the vacant names, as unindented air's and sea's--the unreturn'd,	  Of the vacant names, as unindented air's and sea's--the unreturn'd,
  The brief truce after battle, with grim burial-squads, and the	  The brief truce after battle, with grim burial-squads, and the	  The brief truce after battle, with grim burial-squads, and the	  The brief truce after battle, with grim burial-squads, and the
      deep-fill'd trenches	      deep-fill'd trenches	      deep-fill'd trenches	      deep-fill'd trenches
  Of gather'd from dead all America, North, South, East, West, whence	  Of gather'd from dead all America, North, South, East, West, whence	  Of gather'd from dead all America, North, South, East, West, whence	  Of gather'd from dead all America, North, South, East, West, whence
      they came up,	      they came up,	      they came up,	      they came up,
  From wooded Maine, New-England's farms, from fertile Pennsylvania,	  From wooded Maine, New-England's farms, from fertile Pennsylvania,	  From wooded Maine, New-England's farms, from fertile Pennsylvania,	  From wooded Maine, New-England's farms, from fertile Pennsylvania,
      Illinois, Ohio,	      Illinois, Ohio,	      Illinois, Ohio,	      Illinois, Ohio,
  From the measureless West, Virginia, the South, the Carolinas, Texas,	  From the measureless West, Virginia, the South, the Carolinas, Texas,	  From the measureless West, Virginia, the South, the Carolinas, Texas,	  From the measureless West, Virginia, the South, the Carolinas, Texas,
  (Even here in my room-shadows and half-lights in the noiseless	  (Even here in my room-shadows and half-lights in the noiseless	  (Even here in my room-shadows and half-lights in the noiseless	  (Even here in my room-shadows and half-lights in the noiseless
      flickering flames,	      flickering flames,	      flickering flames,	      flickering flames,
  Again I see the stalwart ranks on-filing, rising--I hear the	  Again I see the stalwart ranks on-filing, rising--I hear the	  Again I see the stalwart ranks on-filing, rising--I hear the	  Again I see the stalwart ranks on-filing, rising--I hear the
      rhythmic tramp of the armies;)	      rhythmic tramp of the armies;)	      rhythmic tramp of the armies;)	      rhythmic tramp of the armies;)
  You million unwrit names all, all--you dark bequest from all the war,	  You million unwrit names all, all--you dark bequest from all the war,	  You million unwrit names all, all--you dark bequest from all the war,	  You million unwrit names all, all--you dark bequest from all the war,
  A special verse for you--a flash of duty long neglected--your mystic	  A special verse for you--a flash of duty long neglected--your mystic	  A special verse for you--a flash of duty long neglected--your mystic	  A special verse for you--a flash of duty long neglected--your mystic
      roll strangely gather'd here,	      roll strangely gather'd here,	      roll strangely gather'd here,	      roll strangely gather'd here,
  Each name recall'd by me from out the darkness and death's ashes,	  Each name recall'd by me from out the darkness and death's ashes,	  Each name recall'd by me from out the darkness and death's ashes,	  Each name recall'd by me from out the darkness and death's ashes,
  Henceforth to be, deep, deep within my heart recording, for many	  Henceforth to be, deep, deep within my heart recording, for many	  Henceforth to be, deep, deep within my heart recording, for many	  Henceforth to be, deep, deep within my heart recording, for many
      future year,	      future year,	      future year,	      future year,
  Your mystic roll entire of unknown names, or North or South,	  Your mystic roll entire of unknown names, or North or South,	  Your mystic roll entire of unknown names, or North or South,	  Your mystic roll entire of unknown names, or North or South,
  Embalm'd with love in this twilight song.	  Embalm'd with love in this twilight song.	  Embalm'd with love in this twilight song.	  Embalm'd with love in this twilight song.
			
			
			
			
When the Full-Grown Poet Came	When the Full-Grown Poet Came	When the Full-Grown Poet Came	When the Full-Grown Poet Came
			
  When the full-grown poet came,	  When the full-grown poet came,	  When the full-grown poet came,	  When the full-grown poet came,
  Out spake pleased Nature (the round impassive globe, with all its	  Out spake pleased Nature (the round impassive globe, with all its	  Out spake pleased Nature (the round impassive globe, with all its	  Out spake pleased Nature (the round impassive globe, with all its
      shows of day and night,) saying, He is mine;	      shows of day and night,) saying, He is mine;	      shows of day and night,) saying, He is mine;	      shows of day and night,) saying, He is mine;
  But out spake too the Soul of man, proud, jealous and unreconciled,	  But out spake too the Soul of man, proud, jealous and unreconciled,	  But out spake too the Soul of man, proud, jealous and unreconciled,	  But out spake too the Soul of man, proud, jealous and unreconciled,
      Nay he is mine alone;	      Nay he is mine alone;	      Nay he is mine alone;	      Nay he is mine alone;
  --Then the full-grown poet stood between the two, and took each	  --Then the full-grown poet stood between the two, and took each	  --Then the full-grown poet stood between the two, and took each	  --Then the full-grown poet stood between the two, and took each
      by the hand;	      by the hand;	      by the hand;	      by the hand;
  And to-day and ever so stands, as blender, uniter, tightly holding hands,	  And to-day and ever so stands, as blender, uniter, tightly holding hands,	  And to-day and ever so stands, as blender, uniter, tightly holding hands,	  And to-day and ever so stands, as blender, uniter, tightly holding hands,
  Which he will never release until he reconciles the two,	  Which he will never release until he reconciles the two,	  Which he will never release until he reconciles the two,	  Which he will never release until he reconciles the two,
  And wholly and joyously blends them.	  And wholly and joyously blends them.	  And wholly and joyously blends them.	  And wholly and joyously blends them.
			
			
			
			
Osceola	Osceola	Osceola	Osceola
			
  When his hour for death had come,	  When his hour for death had come,	  When his hour for death had come,	  When his hour for death had come,
  He slowly rais'd himself from the bed on the floor,	  He slowly rais'd himself from the bed on the floor,	  He slowly rais'd himself from the bed on the floor,	  He slowly rais'd himself from the bed on the floor,
  Drew on his war-dress, shirt, leggings, and girdled the belt around	  Drew on his war-dress, shirt, leggings, and girdled the belt around	  Drew on his war-dress, shirt, leggings, and girdled the belt around	  Drew on his war-dress, shirt, leggings, and girdled the belt around
      his waist,	      his waist,	      his waist,	      his waist,
  Call'd for vermilion paint (his looking-glass was held before him,)	  Call'd for vermilion paint (his looking-glass was held before him,)	  Call'd for vermilion paint (his looking-glass was held before him,)	  Call'd for vermilion paint (his looking-glass was held before him,)
  Painted half his face and neck, his wrists, and back-hands.	  Painted half his face and neck, his wrists, and back-hands.	  Painted half his face and neck, his wrists, and back-hands.	  Painted half his face and neck, his wrists, and back-hands.
  Put the scalp-knife carefully in his belt--then lying down, resting	  Put the scalp-knife carefully in his belt--then lying down, resting	  Put the scalp-knife carefully in his belt--then lying down, resting	  Put the scalp-knife carefully in his belt--then lying down, resting
      moment,	      moment,	      moment,	      moment,
  Rose again, half sitting, smiled, gave in silence his extended hand	  Rose again, half sitting, smiled, gave in silence his extended hand	  Rose again, half sitting, smiled, gave in silence his extended hand	  Rose again, half sitting, smiled, gave in silence his extended hand
      to each and all,	      to each and all,	      to each and all,	      to each and all,
  Sank faintly low to the floor (tightly grasping the tomahawk handle,)	  Sank faintly low to the floor (tightly grasping the tomahawk handle,)	  Sank faintly low to the floor (tightly grasping the tomahawk handle,)	  Sank faintly low to the floor (tightly grasping the tomahawk handle,)
  Fix'd his look on wife and little children--the last:	  Fix'd his look on wife and little children--the last:	  Fix'd his look on wife and little children--the last:	  Fix'd his look on wife and little children--the last:
			
  (And here a line in memory of his name and death.)	  (And here a line in memory of his name and death.)	  (And here a line in memory of his name and death.)	  (And here a line in memory of his name and death.)
			
			
			
			
A Voice from Death	A Voice from Death	A Voice from Death	A Voice from Death
			
  A voice from Death, solemn and strange, in all his sweep and power,	  A voice from Death, solemn and strange, in all his sweep and power,	  A voice from Death, solemn and strange, in all his sweep and power,	  A voice from Death, solemn and strange, in all his sweep and power,
  With sudden, indescribable blow--towns drown'd--humanity by	  With sudden, indescribable blow--towns drown'd--humanity by	  With sudden, indescribable blow--towns drown'd--humanity by	  With sudden, indescribable blow--towns drown'd--humanity by
      thousands slain,	      thousands slain,	      thousands slain,	      thousands slain,
  The vaunted work of thrift, goods, dwellings, forge, street, iron bridge,	  The vaunted work of thrift, goods, dwellings, forge, street, iron bridge,	  The vaunted work of thrift, goods, dwellings, forge, street, iron bridge,	  The vaunted work of thrift, goods, dwellings, forge, street, iron bridge,
  Dash'd pell-mell by the blow--yet usher'd life continuing on,	  Dash'd pell-mell by the blow--yet usher'd life continuing on,	  Dash'd pell-mell by the blow--yet usher'd life continuing on,	  Dash'd pell-mell by the blow--yet usher'd life continuing on,
  (Amid the rest, amid the rushing, whirling, wild debris,	  (Amid the rest, amid the rushing, whirling, wild debris,	  (Amid the rest, amid the rushing, whirling, wild debris,	  (Amid the rest, amid the rushing, whirling, wild debris,
  A suffering woman saved--a baby safely born!)	  A suffering woman saved--a baby safely born!)	  A suffering woman saved--a baby safely born!)	  A suffering woman saved--a baby safely born!)
			
  Although I come and unannounc'd, in horror and in pang,	  Although I come and unannounc'd, in horror and in pang,	  Although I come and unannounc'd, in horror and in pang,	  Although I come and unannounc'd, in horror and in pang,
  In pouring flood and fire, and wholesale elemental crash, (this	  In pouring flood and fire, and wholesale elemental crash, (this	  In pouring flood and fire, and wholesale elemental crash, (this	  In pouring flood and fire, and wholesale elemental crash, (this
      voice so solemn, strange,)	      voice so solemn, strange,)	      voice so solemn, strange,)	      voice so solemn, strange,)
  I too a minister of Deity.	  I too a minister of Deity.	  I too a minister of Deity.	  I too a minister of Deity.
			
  Yea, Death, we bow our faces, veil our eyes to thee,	  Yea, Death, we bow our faces, veil our eyes to thee,	  Yea, Death, we bow our faces, veil our eyes to thee,	  Yea, Death, we bow our faces, veil our eyes to thee,
  We mourn the old, the young untimely drawn to thee,	  We mourn the old, the young untimely drawn to thee,	  We mourn the old, the young untimely drawn to thee,	  We mourn the old, the young untimely drawn to thee,
  The fair, the strong, the good, the capable,	  The fair, the strong, the good, the capable,	  The fair, the strong, the good, the capable,	  The fair, the strong, the good, the capable,
  The household wreck'd, the husband and the wife, the engulfed forger	  The household wreck'd, the husband and the wife, the engulfed forger	  The household wreck'd, the husband and the wife, the engulfed forger	  The household wreck'd, the husband and the wife, the engulfed forger
      in his forge,	      in his forge,	      in his forge,	      in his forge,
  The corpses in the whelming waters and the mud,	  The corpses in the whelming waters and the mud,	  The corpses in the whelming waters and the mud,	  The corpses in the whelming waters and the mud,
  The gather'd thousands to their funeral mounds, and thousands never	  The gather'd thousands to their funeral mounds, and thousands never	  The gather'd thousands to their funeral mounds, and thousands never	  The gather'd thousands to their funeral mounds, and thousands never
      found or gather'd.	      found or gather'd.	      found or gather'd.	      found or gather'd.
			
  Then after burying, mourning the dead,	  Then after burying, mourning the dead,	  Then after burying, mourning the dead,	  Then after burying, mourning the dead,
  (Faithful to them found or unfound, forgetting not, bearing the	  (Faithful to them found or unfound, forgetting not, bearing the	  (Faithful to them found or unfound, forgetting not, bearing the	  (Faithful to them found or unfound, forgetting not, bearing the
      past, here new musing,)	      past, here new musing,)	      past, here new musing,)	      past, here new musing,)
  A day--a passing moment or an hour--America itself bends low,	  A day--a passing moment or an hour--America itself bends low,	  A day--a passing moment or an hour--America itself bends low,	  A day--a passing moment or an hour--America itself bends low,
  Silent, resign'd, submissive.	  Silent, resign'd, submissive.	  Silent, resign'd, submissive.	  Silent, resign'd, submissive.
			
  War, death, cataclysm like this, America,	  War, death, cataclysm like this, America,	  War, death, cataclysm like this, America,	  War, death, cataclysm like this, America,
  Take deep to thy proud prosperous heart.	  Take deep to thy proud prosperous heart.	  Take deep to thy proud prosperous heart.	  Take deep to thy proud prosperous heart.
			
  E'en as I chant, lo! out of death, and out of ooze and slime,	  E'en as I chant, lo! out of death, and out of ooze and slime,	  E'en as I chant, lo! out of death, and out of ooze and slime,	  E'en as I chant, lo! out of death, and out of ooze and slime,
  The blossoms rapidly blooming, sympathy, help, love,	  The blossoms rapidly blooming, sympathy, help, love,	  The blossoms rapidly blooming, sympathy, help, love,	  The blossoms rapidly blooming, sympathy, help, love,
  From West and East, from South and North and over sea,	  From West and East, from South and North and over sea,	  From West and East, from South and North and over sea,	  From West and East, from South and North and over sea,
  Its hot-spurr'd hearts and hands humanity to human aid moves on;	  Its hot-spurr'd hearts and hands humanity to human aid moves on;	  Its hot-spurr'd hearts and hands humanity to human aid moves on;	  Its hot-spurr'd hearts and hands humanity to human aid moves on;
  And from within a thought and lesson yet.	  And from within a thought and lesson yet.	  And from within a thought and lesson yet.	  And from within a thought and lesson yet.
			
  Thou ever-darting Globe! through Space and Air!	  Thou ever-darting Globe! through Space and Air!	  Thou ever-darting Globe! through Space and Air!	  Thou ever-darting Globe! through Space and Air!
  Thou waters that encompass us!	  Thou waters that encompass us!	  Thou waters that encompass us!	  Thou waters that encompass us!
  Thou that in all the life and death of us, in action or in sleep!	  Thou that in all the life and death of us, in action or in sleep!	  Thou that in all the life and death of us, in action or in sleep!	  Thou that in all the life and death of us, in action or in sleep!
  Thou laws invisible that permeate them and all,	  Thou laws invisible that permeate them and all,	  Thou laws invisible that permeate them and all,	  Thou laws invisible that permeate them and all,
  Thou that in all, and over all, and through and under all, incessant!	  Thou that in all, and over all, and through and under all, incessant!	  Thou that in all, and over all, and through and under all, incessant!	  Thou that in all, and over all, and through and under all, incessant!
  Thou! thou! the vital, universal, giant force resistless, sleepless, calm,	  Thou! thou! the vital, universal, giant force resistless, sleepless, calm,	  Thou! thou! the vital, universal, giant force resistless, sleepless, calm,	  Thou! thou! the vital, universal, giant force resistless, sleepless, calm,
  Holding Humanity as in thy open hand, as some ephemeral toy,	  Holding Humanity as in thy open hand, as some ephemeral toy,	  Holding Humanity as in thy open hand, as some ephemeral toy,	  Holding Humanity as in thy open hand, as some ephemeral toy,
  How ill to e'er forget thee!	  How ill to e'er forget thee!	  How ill to e'er forget thee!	  How ill to e'er forget thee!
			
  For I too have forgotten,	  For I too have forgotten,	  For I too have forgotten,	  For I too have forgotten,
  (Wrapt in these little potencies of progress, politics, culture,	  (Wrapt in these little potencies of progress, politics, culture,	  (Wrapt in these little potencies of progress, politics, culture,	  (Wrapt in these little potencies of progress, politics, culture,
      wealth, inventions, civilization,)	      wealth, inventions, civilization,)	      wealth, inventions, civilization,)	      wealth, inventions, civilization,)
  Have lost my recognition of your silent ever-swaying power, ye	  Have lost my recognition of your silent ever-swaying power, ye	  Have lost my recognition of your silent ever-swaying power, ye	  Have lost my recognition of your silent ever-swaying power, ye
      mighty, elemental throes,	      mighty, elemental throes,	      mighty, elemental throes,	      mighty, elemental throes,
  In which and upon which we float, and every one of us is buoy'd.	  In which and upon which we float, and every one of us is buoy'd.	  In which and upon which we float, and every one of us is buoy'd.	  In which and upon which we float, and every one of us is buoy'd.
			
			
			
			
A Persian Lesson	A Persian Lesson	A Persian Lesson	A Persian Lesson
			
  For his o'erarching and last lesson the greybeard sufi,	  For his o'erarching and last lesson the greybeard sufi,	  For his o'erarching and last lesson the greybeard sufi,	  For his o'erarching and last lesson the greybeard sufi,
  In the fresh scent of the morning in the open air,	  In the fresh scent of the morning in the open air,	  In the fresh scent of the morning in the open air,	  In the fresh scent of the morning in the open air,
  On the slope of a teeming Persian rose-garden,	  On the slope of a teeming Persian rose-garden,	  On the slope of a teeming Persian rose-garden,	  On the slope of a teeming Persian rose-garden,
  Under an ancient chestnut-tree wide spreading its branches,	  Under an ancient chestnut-tree wide spreading its branches,	  Under an ancient chestnut-tree wide spreading its branches,	  Under an ancient chestnut-tree wide spreading its branches,
  Spoke to the young priests and students.	  Spoke to the young priests and students.	  Spoke to the young priests and students.	  Spoke to the young priests and students.
			
  "Finally my children, to envelop each word, each part of the rest,	  "Finally my children, to envelop each word, each part of the rest,	  "Finally my children, to envelop each word, each part of the rest,	  "Finally my children, to envelop each word, each part of the rest,
  Allah is all, all, all--immanent in every life and object,	  Allah is all, all, all--immanent in every life and object,	  Allah is all, all, all--immanent in every life and object,	  Allah is all, all, all--immanent in every life and object,
  May-be at many and many-a-more removes--yet Allah, Allah, Allah is there.	  May-be at many and many-a-more removes--yet Allah, Allah, Allah is there.	  May-be at many and many-a-more removes--yet Allah, Allah, Allah is there.	  May-be at many and many-a-more removes--yet Allah, Allah, Allah is there.
			
  "Has the estray wander'd far? Is the reason-why strangely hidden?	  "Has the estray wander'd far? Is the reason-why strangely hidden?	  "Has the estray wander'd far? Is the reason-why strangely hidden?	  "Has the estray wander'd far? Is the reason-why strangely hidden?
  Would you sound below the restless ocean of the entire world?	  Would you sound below the restless ocean of the entire world?	  Would you sound below the restless ocean of the entire world?	  Would you sound below the restless ocean of the entire world?
  Would you know the dissatisfaction? the urge and spur of every life;	  Would you know the dissatisfaction? the urge and spur of every life;	  Would you know the dissatisfaction? the urge and spur of every life;	  Would you know the dissatisfaction? the urge and spur of every life;
  The something never still'd--never entirely gone? the invisible need	  The something never still'd--never entirely gone? the invisible need	  The something never still'd--never entirely gone? the invisible need	  The something never still'd--never entirely gone? the invisible need
      of every seed?	      of every seed?	      of every seed?	      of every seed?
			
  "It is the central urge in every atom,	  "It is the central urge in every atom,	  "It is the central urge in every atom,	  "It is the central urge in every atom,
  (Often unconscious, often evil, downfallen,)	  (Often unconscious, often evil, downfallen,)	  (Often unconscious, often evil, downfallen,)	  (Often unconscious, often evil, downfallen,)
  To return to its divine source and origin, however distant,	  To return to its divine source and origin, however distant,	  To return to its divine source and origin, however distant,	  To return to its divine source and origin, however distant,
  Latent the same in subject and in object, without one exception."	  Latent the same in subject and in object, without one exception."	  Latent the same in subject and in object, without one exception."	  Latent the same in subject and in object, without one exception."
			
			
			
			
The Commonplace	The Commonplace	The Commonplace	The Commonplace
			
  The commonplace I sing;	  The commonplace I sing;	  The commonplace I sing;	  The commonplace I sing;
  How cheap is health! how cheap nobility!	  How cheap is health! how cheap nobility!	  How cheap is health! how cheap nobility!	  How cheap is health! how cheap nobility!
  Abstinence, no falsehood, no gluttony, lust;	  Abstinence, no falsehood, no gluttony, lust;	  Abstinence, no falsehood, no gluttony, lust;	  Abstinence, no falsehood, no gluttony, lust;
  The open air I sing, freedom, toleration,	  The open air I sing, freedom, toleration,	  The open air I sing, freedom, toleration,	  The open air I sing, freedom, toleration,
  (Take here the mainest lesson--less from books--less from the schools,)	  (Take here the mainest lesson--less from books--less from the schools,)	  (Take here the mainest lesson--less from books--less from the schools,)	  (Take here the mainest lesson--less from books--less from the schools,)
  The common day and night--the common earth and waters,	  The common day and night--the common earth and waters,	  The common day and night--the common earth and waters,	  The common day and night--the common earth and waters,
  Your farm--your work, trade, occupation,	  Your farm--your work, trade, occupation,	  Your farm--your work, trade, occupation,	  Your farm--your work, trade, occupation,
  The democratic wisdom underneath, like solid ground for all.	  The democratic wisdom underneath, like solid ground for all.	  The democratic wisdom underneath, like solid ground for all.	  The democratic wisdom underneath, like solid ground for all.
			
			
			
			
"The Rounded Catalogue Divine Complete"	"The Rounded Catalogue Divine Complete"	"The Rounded Catalogue Divine Complete"	"The Rounded Catalogue Divine Complete"
			
  The devilish and the dark, the dying and diseas'd,	  The devilish and the dark, the dying and diseas'd,	  The devilish and the dark, the dying and diseas'd,	  The devilish and the dark, the dying and diseas'd,
  The countless (nineteen-twentieths) low and evil, crude and savage,	  The countless (nineteen-twentieths) low and evil, crude and savage,	  The countless (nineteen-twentieths) low and evil, crude and savage,	  The countless (nineteen-twentieths) low and evil, crude and savage,
  The crazed, prisoners in jail, the horrible, rank, malignant,	  The crazed, prisoners in jail, the horrible, rank, malignant,	  The crazed, prisoners in jail, the horrible, rank, malignant,	  The crazed, prisoners in jail, the horrible, rank, malignant,
  Venom and filth, serpents, the ravenous sharks, liars, the dissolute;	  Venom and filth, serpents, the ravenous sharks, liars, the dissolute;	  Venom and filth, serpents, the ravenous sharks, liars, the dissolute;	  Venom and filth, serpents, the ravenous sharks, liars, the dissolute;
  (What is the part the wicked and the loathesome bear within earth's	  (What is the part the wicked and the loathesome bear within earth's	  (What is the part the wicked and the loathesome bear within earth's	  (What is the part the wicked and the loathesome bear within earth's
      orbic scheme?)	      orbic scheme?)	      orbic scheme?)	      orbic scheme?)
  Newts, crawling things in slime and mud, poisons,	  Newts, crawling things in slime and mud, poisons,	  Newts, crawling things in slime and mud, poisons,	  Newts, crawling things in slime and mud, poisons,
  The barren soil, the evil men, the slag and hideous rot.	  The barren soil, the evil men, the slag and hideous rot.	  The barren soil, the evil men, the slag and hideous rot.	  The barren soil, the evil men, the slag and hideous rot.
			
			
			
			
Mirages	Mirages	Mirages	Mirages
			
  More experiences and sights, stranger, than you'd think for;	  More experiences and sights, stranger, than you'd think for;	  More experiences and sights, stranger, than you'd think for;	  More experiences and sights, stranger, than you'd think for;
  Times again, now mostly just after sunrise or before sunset,	  Times again, now mostly just after sunrise or before sunset,	  Times again, now mostly just after sunrise or before sunset,	  Times again, now mostly just after sunrise or before sunset,
  Sometimes in spring, oftener in autumn, perfectly clear weather, in	  Sometimes in spring, oftener in autumn, perfectly clear weather, in	  Sometimes in spring, oftener in autumn, perfectly clear weather, in	  Sometimes in spring, oftener in autumn, perfectly clear weather, in
      plain sight,	      plain sight,	      plain sight,	      plain sight,
  Camps far or near, the crowded streets of cities and the shopfronts,	  Camps far or near, the crowded streets of cities and the shopfronts,	  Camps far or near, the crowded streets of cities and the shopfronts,	  Camps far or near, the crowded streets of cities and the shopfronts,
  (Account for it or not--credit or not--it is all true,	  (Account for it or not--credit or not--it is all true,	  (Account for it or not--credit or not--it is all true,	  (Account for it or not--credit or not--it is all true,
  And my mate there could tell you the like--we have often confab'd	  And my mate there could tell you the like--we have often confab'd	  And my mate there could tell you the like--we have often confab'd	  And my mate there could tell you the like--we have often confab'd
      about it,)	      about it,)	      about it,)	      about it,)
  People and scenes, animals, trees, colors and lines, plain as could be,	  People and scenes, animals, trees, colors and lines, plain as could be,	  People and scenes, animals, trees, colors and lines, plain as could be,	  People and scenes, animals, trees, colors and lines, plain as could be,
  Farms and dooryards of home, paths border'd with box, lilacs in corners,	  Farms and dooryards of home, paths border'd with box, lilacs in corners,	  Farms and dooryards of home, paths border'd with box, lilacs in corners,	  Farms and dooryards of home, paths border'd with box, lilacs in corners,
  Weddings in churches, thanksgiving dinners, returns of long-absent sons,	  Weddings in churches, thanksgiving dinners, returns of long-absent sons,	  Weddings in churches, thanksgiving dinners, returns of long-absent sons,	  Weddings in churches, thanksgiving dinners, returns of long-absent sons,
  Glum funerals, the crape-veil'd mother and the daughters,	  Glum funerals, the crape-veil'd mother and the daughters,	  Glum funerals, the crape-veil'd mother and the daughters,	  Glum funerals, the crape-veil'd mother and the daughters,
  Trials in courts, jury and judge, the accused in the box,	  Trials in courts, jury and judge, the accused in the box,	  Trials in courts, jury and judge, the accused in the box,	  Trials in courts, jury and judge, the accused in the box,
  Contestants, battles, crowds, bridges, wharves,	  Contestants, battles, crowds, bridges, wharves,	  Contestants, battles, crowds, bridges, wharves,	  Contestants, battles, crowds, bridges, wharves,
  Now and then mark'd faces of sorrow or joy,	  Now and then mark'd faces of sorrow or joy,	  Now and then mark'd faces of sorrow or joy,	  Now and then mark'd faces of sorrow or joy,
  (I could pick them out this moment if I saw them again,)	  (I could pick them out this moment if I saw them again,)	  (I could pick them out this moment if I saw them again,)	  (I could pick them out this moment if I saw them again,)
  Show'd to me--just to the right in the sky-edge,	  Show'd to me--just to the right in the sky-edge,	  Show'd to me--just to the right in the sky-edge,	  Show'd to me--just to the right in the sky-edge,
  Or plainly there to the left on the hill-tops.	  Or plainly there to the left on the hill-tops.	  Or plainly there to the left on the hill-tops.	  Or plainly there to the left on the hill-tops.
			
			
			
			
L. of G.'s Purport	L. of G.'s Purport	L. of G.'s Purport	L. of G.'s Purport
			
  Not to exclude or demarcate, or pick out evils from their formidable	  Not to exclude or demarcate, or pick out evils from their formidable	  Not to exclude or demarcate, or pick out evils from their formidable	  Not to exclude or demarcate, or pick out evils from their formidable
      masses (even to expose them,)	      masses (even to expose them,)	      masses (even to expose them,)	      masses (even to expose them,)
  But add, fuse, complete, extend--and celebrate the immortal and the good.	  But add, fuse, complete, extend--and celebrate the immortal and the good.	  But add, fuse, complete, extend--and celebrate the immortal and the good.	  But add, fuse, complete, extend--and celebrate the immortal and the good.
  Haughty this song, its words and scope,	  Haughty this song, its words and scope,	  Haughty this song, its words and scope,	  Haughty this song, its words and scope,
  To span vast realms of space and time,	  To span vast realms of space and time,	  To span vast realms of space and time,	  To span vast realms of space and time,
  Evolution--the cumulative--growths and generations.	  Evolution--the cumulative--growths and generations.	  Evolution--the cumulative--growths and generations.	  Evolution--the cumulative--growths and generations.
			
  Begun in ripen'd youth and steadily pursued,	  Begun in ripen'd youth and steadily pursued,	  Begun in ripen'd youth and steadily pursued,	  Begun in ripen'd youth and steadily pursued,
  Wandering, peering, dallying with all--war, peace, day and night	  Wandering, peering, dallying with all--war, peace, day and night	  Wandering, peering, dallying with all--war, peace, day and night	  Wandering, peering, dallying with all--war, peace, day and night
      absorbing,	      absorbing,	      absorbing,	      absorbing,
  Never even for one brief hour abandoning my task,	  Never even for one brief hour abandoning my task,	  Never even for one brief hour abandoning my task,	  Never even for one brief hour abandoning my task,
  I end it here in sickness, poverty, and old age.	  I end it here in sickness, poverty, and old age.	  I end it here in sickness, poverty, and old age.	  I end it here in sickness, poverty, and old age.
			
  I sing of life, yet mind me well of death:	  I sing of life, yet mind me well of death:	  I sing of life, yet mind me well of death:	  I sing of life, yet mind me well of death:
  To-day shadowy Death dogs my steps, my seated shape, and has for years--	  To-day shadowy Death dogs my steps, my seated shape, and has for years--	  To-day shadowy Death dogs my steps, my seated shape, and has for years--	  To-day shadowy Death dogs my steps, my seated shape, and has for years--
  Draws sometimes close to me, as face to face.	  Draws sometimes close to me, as face to face.	  Draws sometimes close to me, as face to face.	  Draws sometimes close to me, as face to face.
			
			
			
			
The Unexpress'd	The Unexpress'd	The Unexpress'd	The Unexpress'd
			
  How dare one say it?	  How dare one say it?	  How dare one say it?	  How dare one say it?
  After the cycles, poems, singers, plays,	  After the cycles, poems, singers, plays,	  After the cycles, poems, singers, plays,	  After the cycles, poems, singers, plays,
  Vaunted Ionia's, India's--Homer, Shakspere--the long, long times'	  Vaunted Ionia's, India's--Homer, Shakspere--the long, long times'	  Vaunted Ionia's, India's--Homer, Shakspere--the long, long times'	  Vaunted Ionia's, India's--Homer, Shakspere--the long, long times'
      thick dotted roads, areas,	      thick dotted roads, areas,	      thick dotted roads, areas,	      thick dotted roads, areas,
  The shining clusters and the Milky Ways of stars--Nature's pulses reap'd,	  The shining clusters and the Milky Ways of stars--Nature's pulses reap'd,	  The shining clusters and the Milky Ways of stars--Nature's pulses reap'd,	  The shining clusters and the Milky Ways of stars--Nature's pulses reap'd,
  All retrospective passions, heroes, war, love, adoration,	  All retrospective passions, heroes, war, love, adoration,	  All retrospective passions, heroes, war, love, adoration,	  All retrospective passions, heroes, war, love, adoration,
  All ages' plummets dropt to their utmost depths,	  All ages' plummets dropt to their utmost depths,	  All ages' plummets dropt to their utmost depths,	  All ages' plummets dropt to their utmost depths,
  All human lives, throats, wishes, brains--all experiences' utterance;	  All human lives, throats, wishes, brains--all experiences' utterance;	  All human lives, throats, wishes, brains--all experiences' utterance;	  All human lives, throats, wishes, brains--all experiences' utterance;
  After the countless songs, or long or short, all tongues, all lands,	  After the countless songs, or long or short, all tongues, all lands,	  After the countless songs, or long or short, all tongues, all lands,	  After the countless songs, or long or short, all tongues, all lands,
  Still something not yet told in poesy's voice or print--something lacking,	  Still something not yet told in poesy's voice or print--something lacking,	  Still something not yet told in poesy's voice or print--something lacking,	  Still something not yet told in poesy's voice or print--something lacking,
  (Who knows? the best yet unexpress'd and lacking.)	  (Who knows? the best yet unexpress'd and lacking.)	  (Who knows? the best yet unexpress'd and lacking.)	  (Who knows? the best yet unexpress'd and lacking.)
			
			
			
			
Grand Is the Seen	Grand Is the Seen	Grand Is the Seen	Grand Is the Seen
			
  Grand is the seen, the light, to me--grand are the sky and stars,	  Grand is the seen, the light, to me--grand are the sky and stars,	  Grand is the seen, the light, to me--grand are the sky and stars,	  Grand is the seen, the light, to me--grand are the sky and stars,
  Grand is the earth, and grand are lasting time and space,	  Grand is the earth, and grand are lasting time and space,	  Grand is the earth, and grand are lasting time and space,	  Grand is the earth, and grand are lasting time and space,
  And grand their laws, so multiform, puzzling, evolutionary;	  And grand their laws, so multiform, puzzling, evolutionary;	  And grand their laws, so multiform, puzzling, evolutionary;	  And grand their laws, so multiform, puzzling, evolutionary;
  But grander far the unseen soul of me, comprehending, endowing all those,	  But grander far the unseen soul of me, comprehending, endowing all those,	  But grander far the unseen soul of me, comprehending, endowing all those,	  But grander far the unseen soul of me, comprehending, endowing all those,
  Lighting the light, the sky and stars, delving the earth, sailing	  Lighting the light, the sky and stars, delving the earth, sailing	  Lighting the light, the sky and stars, delving the earth, sailing	  Lighting the light, the sky and stars, delving the earth, sailing
      the sea,	      the sea,	      the sea,	      the sea,
  (What were all those, indeed, without thee, unseen soul? of what	  (What were all those, indeed, without thee, unseen soul? of what	  (What were all those, indeed, without thee, unseen soul? of what	  (What were all those, indeed, without thee, unseen soul? of what
      amount without thee?)	      amount without thee?)	      amount without thee?)	      amount without thee?)
  More evolutionary, vast, puzzling, O my soul!	  More evolutionary, vast, puzzling, O my soul!	  More evolutionary, vast, puzzling, O my soul!	  More evolutionary, vast, puzzling, O my soul!
  More multiform far--more lasting thou than they.	  More multiform far--more lasting thou than they.	  More multiform far--more lasting thou than they.	  More multiform far--more lasting thou than they.
			
			
			
			
Unseen Buds	Unseen Buds	Unseen Buds	Unseen Buds
			
  Unseen buds, infinite, hidden well,	  Unseen buds, infinite, hidden well,	  Unseen buds, infinite, hidden well,	  Unseen buds, infinite, hidden well,
  Under the snow and ice, under the darkness, in every square or cubic inch,	  Under the snow and ice, under the darkness, in every square or cubic inch,	  Under the snow and ice, under the darkness, in every square or cubic inch,	  Under the snow and ice, under the darkness, in every square or cubic inch,
  Germinal, exquisite, in delicate lace, microscopic, unborn,	  Germinal, exquisite, in delicate lace, microscopic, unborn,	  Germinal, exquisite, in delicate lace, microscopic, unborn,	  Germinal, exquisite, in delicate lace, microscopic, unborn,
  Like babes in wombs, latent, folded, compact, sleeping;	  Like babes in wombs, latent, folded, compact, sleeping;	  Like babes in wombs, latent, folded, compact, sleeping;	  Like babes in wombs, latent, folded, compact, sleeping;
  Billions of billions, and trillions of trillions of them waiting,	  Billions of billions, and trillions of trillions of them waiting,	  Billions of billions, and trillions of trillions of them waiting,	  Billions of billions, and trillions of trillions of them waiting,
  (On earth and in the sea--the universe--the stars there in the	  (On earth and in the sea--the universe--the stars there in the	  (On earth and in the sea--the universe--the stars there in the	  (On earth and in the sea--the universe--the stars there in the
      heavens,)	      heavens,)	      heavens,)	      heavens,)
  Urging slowly, surely forward, forming endless,	  Urging slowly, surely forward, forming endless,	  Urging slowly, surely forward, forming endless,	  Urging slowly, surely forward, forming endless,
  And waiting ever more, forever more behind.	  And waiting ever more, forever more behind.	  And waiting ever more, forever more behind.	  And waiting ever more, forever more behind.
			
			
			
			
Good-Bye My Fancy!	Good-Bye My Fancy!	Good-Bye My Fancy!	Good-Bye My Fancy!
			
  Good-bye my Fancy!	  Good-bye my Fancy!	  Good-bye my Fancy!	  Good-bye my Fancy!
  Farewell dear mate, dear love!	  Farewell dear mate, dear love!	  Farewell dear mate, dear love!	  Farewell dear mate, dear love!
  I'm going away, I know not where,	  I'm going away, I know not where,	  I'm going away, I know not where,	  I'm going away, I know not where,
  Or to what fortune, or whether I may ever see you again,	  Or to what fortune, or whether I may ever see you again,	  Or to what fortune, or whether I may ever see you again,	  Or to what fortune, or whether I may ever see you again,
  So Good-bye my Fancy.	  So Good-bye my Fancy.	  So Good-bye my Fancy.	  So Good-bye my Fancy.
			
  Now for my last--let me look back a moment;	  Now for my last--let me look back a moment;	  Now for my last--let me look back a moment;	  Now for my last--let me look back a moment;
  The slower fainter ticking of the clock is in me,	  The slower fainter ticking of the clock is in me,	  The slower fainter ticking of the clock is in me,	  The slower fainter ticking of the clock is in me,
  Exit, nightfall, and soon the heart-thud stopping.	  Exit, nightfall, and soon the heart-thud stopping.	  Exit, nightfall, and soon the heart-thud stopping.	  Exit, nightfall, and soon the heart-thud stopping.
			
  Long have we lived, joy'd, caress'd together;	  Long have we lived, joy'd, caress'd together;	  Long have we lived, joy'd, caress'd together;	  Long have we lived, joy'd, caress'd together;
  Delightful!--now separation--Good-bye my Fancy.	  Delightful!--now separation--Good-bye my Fancy.	  Delightful!--now separation--Good-bye my Fancy.	  Delightful!--now separation--Good-bye my Fancy.
			
  Yet let me not be too hasty,	  Yet let me not be too hasty,	  Yet let me not be too hasty,	  Yet let me not be too hasty,
  Long indeed have we lived, slept, filter'd, become really blended	  Long indeed have we lived, slept, filter'd, become really blended	  Long indeed have we lived, slept, filter'd, become really blended	  Long indeed have we lived, slept, filter'd, become really blended
      into one;	      into one;	      into one;	      into one;
  Then if we die we die together, (yes, we'll remain one,)	  Then if we die we die together, (yes, we'll remain one,)	  Then if we die we die together, (yes, we'll remain one,)	  Then if we die we die together, (yes, we'll remain one,)
  If we go anywhere we'll go together to meet what happens,	  If we go anywhere we'll go together to meet what happens,	  If we go anywhere we'll go together to meet what happens,	  If we go anywhere we'll go together to meet what happens,
  May-be we'll be better off and blither, and learn something,	  May-be we'll be better off and blither, and learn something,	  May-be we'll be better off and blither, and learn something,	  May-be we'll be better off and blither, and learn something,
  May-be it is yourself now really ushering me to the true songs, (who	  May-be it is yourself now really ushering me to the true songs, (who	  May-be it is yourself now really ushering me to the true songs, (who	  May-be it is yourself now really ushering me to the true songs, (who
      knows?)	      knows?)	      knows?)	      knows?)
  May-be it is you the mortal knob really undoing, turning--so now finally,	  May-be it is you the mortal knob really undoing, turning--so now finally,	  May-be it is you the mortal knob really undoing, turning--so now finally,	  May-be it is you the mortal knob really undoing, turning--so now finally,
  Good-bye--and hail! my Fancy.	  Good-bye--and hail! my Fancy.	  Good-bye--and hail! my Fancy.	  Good-bye--and hail! my Fancy.
			
			
			
			
			
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman	End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman	End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman	End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Leaves of Grass, by Walt Whitman
			
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***	*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***	*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***	*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAVES OF GRASS ***
			
***** This file should be named 1322.txt or 1322.zip *****	***** This file should be named 1322.txt or 1322.zip *****	***** This file should be named 1322.txt or 1322.zip *****	***** This file should be named 1322.txt or 1322.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:	This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:	This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:	This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/2/1322/	        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/2/1322/	        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/2/1322/	        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/2/1322/
			
Produced by G. Fuhrman	Produced by G. Fuhrman	Produced by G. Fuhrman	Produced by G. Fuhrman
			
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions	Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions	Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions	Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.	will be renamed.	will be renamed.	will be renamed.
			
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no	Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no	Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no	Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation	one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation	one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation	one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without	(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without	(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without	(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,	permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,	permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,	permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to	set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to	set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to	set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to	copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to	copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to	copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project	protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project	protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project	protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you	Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you	Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you	Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you	charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you	charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you	charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the	do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the	do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the	do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose	rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose	rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose	rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and	such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and	such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and	such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do	research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do	research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do	research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is	practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is	practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is	practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial	subject to the trademark license, especially commercial	subject to the trademark license, especially commercial	subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.	redistribution.	redistribution.	redistribution.
			
			
			
*** START: FULL LICENSE ***	*** START: FULL LICENSE ***	*** START: FULL LICENSE ***	*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
			
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE	THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE	THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE	THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK	PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK	PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK	PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
			
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free	To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free	To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free	To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work	distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work	distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work	distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project	(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project	(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project	(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project	Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project	Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project	Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at	Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at	Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at	Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).	http://gutenberg.org/license).	http://gutenberg.org/license).	http://gutenberg.org/license).
			
			
Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm	Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm	Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm	Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works	electronic works	electronic works	electronic works
			
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm	1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm	1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm	1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to	electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to	electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to	electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property	and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property	and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property	and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all	(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all	(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all	(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy	the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy	the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy	the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.	all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.	all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.	all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project	If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project	If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project	If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the	Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the	Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the	Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or	terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or	terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or	terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.	entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.	entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.	entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
			
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be	1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be	1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be	1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who	used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who	used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who	used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few	agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few	agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few	agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works	things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works	things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works	things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See	even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See	even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See	even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project	paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project	paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project	paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement	Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement	Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement	Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.	works.  See paragraph 1.E below.	works.  See paragraph 1.E below.	works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
			
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"	1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"	1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"	1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project	or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project	or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project	or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the	Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the	Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the	Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an	collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an	collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an	collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are	individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are	individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are	individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from	located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from	located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from	located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative	copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative	copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative	copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg	works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg	works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg	works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project	are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project	are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project	are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by	Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by	Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by	Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of	freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of	freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of	freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with	this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with	this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with	this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by	the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by	the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by	the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project	keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project	keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project	keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.	Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.	Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.	Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
			
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern	1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern	1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern	1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in	what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in	what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in	what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check	a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check	a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check	a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement	the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement	the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement	the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or	before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or	before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or	before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project	creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project	creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project	creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning	Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning	Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning	Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United	the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United	the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United	the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.	States.	States.	States.
			
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:	1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:	1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:	1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
			
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate	1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate	1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate	1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently	access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently	access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently	access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the	whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the	whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the	whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project	phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project	phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project	phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,	Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,	Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,	Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:	copied or distributed:	copied or distributed:	copied or distributed:
			
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with	This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or	almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included	re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org	with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
			
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived	1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived	1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived	1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is	from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is	from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is	from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied	posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied	posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied	posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees	and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees	and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees	and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work	or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work	or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work	or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the	with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the	with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the	with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1	work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1	work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1	work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the	through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the	through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the	through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or	Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or	Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or	Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.	1.E.9.	1.E.9.	1.E.9.
			
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted	1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted	1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted	1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution	with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution	with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution	with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional	must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional	must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional	must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked	terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked	terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked	terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the	to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the	to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the	to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.	permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.	permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.	permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
			
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm	1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm	1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm	1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this	License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this	License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this	License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.	work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.	work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.	work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
			
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this	1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this	1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this	1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without	electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without	electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without	electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with	prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with	prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with	prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project	active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project	active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project	active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.	Gutenberg-tm License.	Gutenberg-tm License.	Gutenberg-tm License.
			
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,	1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,	1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,	1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any	compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any	compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any	compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or	word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or	word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or	word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than	distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than	distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than	distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version	"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version	"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version	"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),	posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),	posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),	posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a	you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a	you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a	you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon	copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon	copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon	copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other	request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other	request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other	request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm	form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm	form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm	form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.	License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.	License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.	License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
			
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,	1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,	1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,	1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works	performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works	performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works	performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.	unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.	unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.	unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
			
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing	1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing	1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing	1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided	access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided	access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided	access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that	that	that	that
			
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from	- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from	- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from	- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method	     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method	     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method	     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is	     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is	     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is	     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he	     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he	     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he	     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the	     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the	     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the	     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments	     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments	     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments	     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you	     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you	     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you	     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax	     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax	     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax	     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and	     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and	     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and	     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the	     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the	     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the	     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to	     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to	     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to	     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."	     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."	     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."	     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
			
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies	- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies	- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies	- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he	     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he	     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he	     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm	     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm	     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm	     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or	     License.  You must require such a user to return or	     License.  You must require such a user to return or	     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium	     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium	     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium	     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of	     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of	     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of	     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.	     Project Gutenberg-tm works.	     Project Gutenberg-tm works.	     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
			
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any	- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any	- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any	- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the	     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the	     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the	     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days	     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days	     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days	     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.	     of receipt of the work.	     of receipt of the work.	     of receipt of the work.
			
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free	- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free	- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free	- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.	     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.	     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.	     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
			
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm	1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm	1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm	1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set	electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set	electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set	electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from	forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from	forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from	forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael	both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael	both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael	both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the	Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the	Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the	Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.	Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.	Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.	Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
			
1.F.	1.F.	1.F.	1.F.
			
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable	1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable	1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable	1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread	effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread	effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread	effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm	public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm	public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm	public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain	works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain	works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain	works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or	"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or	"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or	"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual	corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual	corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual	corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a	property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a	property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a	property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by	computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by	computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by	computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.	your equipment.	your equipment.	your equipment.
			
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right	1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right	1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right	1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project	of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project	of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project	of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project	Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project	Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project	Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all	Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all	Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all	Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal	liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal	liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal	liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT	fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT	fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT	fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE	LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE	LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE	LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE	PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE	PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE	PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE	TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE	TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE	TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR	LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR	LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR	LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH	INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH	INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH	INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.	DAMAGE.	DAMAGE.	DAMAGE.
			
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a	1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a	1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a	1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can	defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can	defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can	defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a	receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a	receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a	receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you	written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you	written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you	written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with	received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with	received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with	received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with	your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with	your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with	your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a	the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a	the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a	the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity	refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity	refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity	refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to	providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to	providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to	providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy	receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy	receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy	receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further	is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further	is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further	is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.	opportunities to fix the problem.	opportunities to fix the problem.	opportunities to fix the problem.
			
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth	1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth	1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth	1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER	in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER	in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER	in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO	WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO	WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO	WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.	WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.	WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.	WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
			
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied	1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied	1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied	1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.	warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.	warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.	warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the	If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the	If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the	If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be	law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be	law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be	law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by	interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by	interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by	interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any	the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any	the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any	the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.	provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.	provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.	provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
			
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the	1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the	1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the	1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone	trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone	trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone	trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance	providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance	providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance	providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,	with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,	with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,	with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,	promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,	promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,	promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,	harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,	harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,	harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do	that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do	that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do	that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm	or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm	or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm	or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any	work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any	work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any	work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.	Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.	Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.	Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
			
			
Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm	Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm	Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm	Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
			
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of	Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of	Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of	Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers	electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers	electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers	electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists	including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists	including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists	including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from	because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from	because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from	because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.	people in all walks of life.	people in all walks of life.	people in all walks of life.
			
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the	Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the	Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the	Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's	assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's	assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's	assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will	goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will	goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will	goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project	remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project	remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project	remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure	Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.	and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.	and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.	and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation	To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation	To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation	To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4	and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4	and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4	and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.	and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.	and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.	and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
			
			
Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive	Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive	Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive	Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation	Foundation	Foundation	Foundation
			
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit	The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit	The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit	The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the	501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the	501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the	501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal	state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal	state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal	state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification	Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification	Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification	Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at	number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at	number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at	number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg	http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg	http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg	http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent	Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent	Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent	Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.	permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.	permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.	permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
			
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.	The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.	The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.	The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered	Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered	Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered	Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at	throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at	throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at	throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email	809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email	809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email	809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact	business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact	business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact	business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official	information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official	information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official	information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org	page at http://pglaf.org	page at http://pglaf.org	page at http://pglaf.org
			
For additional contact information:	For additional contact information:	For additional contact information:	For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby	     Dr. Gregory B. Newby	     Dr. Gregory B. Newby	     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director	     Chief Executive and Director	     Chief Executive and Director	     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org	     gbnewby@pglaf.org	     gbnewby@pglaf.org	     gbnewby@pglaf.org
			
			
Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg	Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg	Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg	Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation	Literary Archive Foundation	Literary Archive Foundation	Literary Archive Foundation
			
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide	Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide	Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide	Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of	spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of	spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of	spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be	increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be	increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be	increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest	freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest	freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest	freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations	array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations	array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations	array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt	($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt	($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt	($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.	status with the IRS.	status with the IRS.	status with the IRS.
			
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating	The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating	The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating	The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United	charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United	charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United	charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a	States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a	States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a	States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up	considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up	considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up	considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations	with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations	with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations	with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To	where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To	where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To	where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any	SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any	SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any	SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org	particular state visit http://pglaf.org	particular state visit http://pglaf.org	particular state visit http://pglaf.org
			
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we	While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we	While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we	While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition	have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition	have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition	have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who	against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who	against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who	against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.	approach us with offers to donate.	approach us with offers to donate.	approach us with offers to donate.
			
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make	International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make	International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make	International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from	any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from	any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from	any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.	outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.	outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.	outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
			
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation	Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation	Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation	Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other	methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other	methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other	methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.	ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.	ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.	ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate	To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate	To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate	To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
			
			
Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic	Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.	works.	works.	works.
			
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm	Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm	Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm	Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared	concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared	concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared	concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project	with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project	with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project	with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.	Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.	Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.	Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
			
			
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed	Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed	Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed	Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.	editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.	editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.	editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily	unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily	unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily	unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.	keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.	keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.	keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
			
			
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:	Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:	Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:	Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
			
     http://www.gutenberg.org	     http://www.gutenberg.org	     http://www.gutenberg.org	     http://www.gutenberg.org
			
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,	This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,	This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,	This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary	including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary	including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary	including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to	Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to	Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to	Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.	subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.	subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.	subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
